Mon Dec 20, 12:54 pm ET
Re-enlistment choice looms for discharged gay veterans
By Liz Goodwin

The main concern on the minds of two discharged service members now that "don't ask" is repealed: hitting the gym.
"If I'm going to go back to the Army, which I plan to, I need to get in shape," Lt. Dan Choi tells The Lookout. "I've been doing a lot of nonstop media stuff, so I'm not at the level. ... I used to do 100 push-ups in two minutes. I've got to get back."
Michael Gerson, who was discharged in 2005 while in naval submarine training, says he's going to get into shape to take his mind off waiting for repeal to be "certified."
"Realistically, I'm looking at the timetable, and I haven't really done much in the past six years, so I'd have to do something to get back in shape," Gerson of Stockton, Calif., told The Lookout. Both Gerson and Choi tried to re-enlist in October when a federal judge refused to enjoin her decision striking down the law as discriminatory, thus in legal terms creating an opening for would-be re-enlisters who are gay. The new law does not specify that discharged members may re-enlist, but the Pentagon's report on "don't Ask" recommended it.
Choi, who outed himself on Rachel Maddow's MSNBC show and was later arrested for chaining himself to the White House fence to protest "don't ask, don't tell,"  says it will be difficult for him to integrate the past two years he's spent as an activist with the more regimented life of an Army officer. He says his fellow discharged veterans and activists are wrestling with the full implications of finally being allowed to join up again.
"We really are getting in the mindset of, are we ready to go back in the military? It's a tough question, because our country discriminated against us," he said. "There's a PTSD involved with getting kicked out." PTSD is post-traumatic stress disorder.
More than 13,500 service members have been dismissed under the law since it passed in 1993.
Choi expects that many of them will rejoin, but he points out that age requirements for enlisting may prevent some. The Marines' age limit for enlistment is 28. The Army's age limit is 41. It's still unclear whether exceptions will be made for soldiers discharged under "don't ask, don't tell" who now want to reenlist.
"If it takes 12 years, I won't be able to go into the Army," Choi says. "I hope it doesn't take even one year."
Choi said that this interim period will be a time for reflection and preparation. There's "a lot of contemplation, a lot of reflection, still a bit of euphoria" among people, he said. "We all know [that during] this interim period we have to stop and reflect on what service really means."
According to various news reports, discharged Marine Tim Smith of Memphis, Tenn.; discharged Army Sgt. Anthony Wilfert of Nashville, Tenn.; and discharged seven-year Army veteran Warren Arbury of Savannah, Ga., are seriously considering re-enlisting.
Gerson told The Lookout that his re-enlistment plan is to focus on "physical fitness, pay off some bills and everything else, make sure everything's squared away so nothing's going to hinder me."
(Photo of Choi protesting the law in April: AP)


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ray Gibbs 1 minute ago Report Abuse
of course, our American way
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Michaelc 17 minutes ago Report Abuse
A funny thing about Christianity. Did you ever read the New Testament and notice How Jesus admired the Roman soldiers because of their discipline? I think it must have been because He was "drafted" by His Father into doing the job of saving humanity. To fight and die,just like any old G.I.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Estaban 30 minutes ago Report Abuse
So John can get wounded in the line of duty, receive an aids infected transfusion from Jackie and die from dirty blood. Government will be complicit in killing someone because of this accommodation of behavior..
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Just A Little Closer 33 minutes ago Report Abuse
@D
Agreed...Not to mention that more have died,been murdered/raped and tourtured in the name of religion than any other reason or institution.

@Big O
Get a life ....Why don't you ''evolve''?
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Pistol Pete 36 minutes ago Report Abuse
Glad I don't serve anymore. What the hell happened to our country ?
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Horace 37 minutes ago Report Abuse
They can start the Barney Frank Brigade. Everyone holds hands and slishes up the hill backwards.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Al Winterle 41 minutes ago Report Abuse
I knew the crap had hit the fan in 2000 when everyone in the Army was given a black beret. Because EVERYONE is an elite soldier! Political correctness has no place in the armed forces. This was proven by the Fort Hood terrorist attack! This will be absorbed by our fine soldiers, marines, sailors, and airmen, but be assured there will be complications that none of these genius politicians have even contemplated! Harry Ried twittered Lady Gaga about DADT being overturned, makes me want to puke!!!!!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Horace 41 minutes ago Report Abuse
Will the marines have to change the name of the head to the tail?
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Horace 44 minutes ago Report Abuse
I guess the navy will have to change it's name to the fairy boat service.
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Horace 47 minutes ago Report Abuse
Does this give new meaning to a rear guard action?
Reply