Obama signs anti-hunger, anti-obesity school lunch bill

– Mon Dec 13, 1:54 pm ET
WASHINGTON (AFP) – US President Barack Obama on Monday signed into law a bill that will fight childhood hunger and bolster his wife's project to roll back obesity in kids by making school meals healthier.
"Right now, across the country, too many children don't have access to school meals and often the food that's being offered isn't as healthy as it should be," Obama said at a signing ceremony for the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act at an elementary school in Washington.
The new law would help reverse the worrying trend of doctors diagnosing what used to be considered adult conditions -- high blood pressure, high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes -- in increasingly fatter American children, and would do so "without adding a dime to the deficit," Obama said.
The new law, which pledges 4.5 billion dollars over 10 years to child nutrition programs, will give thousands more US children access to school meals and allow the Department of Agriculture to set nutrition guidelines for food sold in schools, including in vending machines.
It comes at a time when 17 million US children live in households that have to sometimes skip meals to make ends meet, and one in three US kids is obese or overweight.
Childhood hunger and obesity were "two sides of the same coin," Michelle Obama said at the signing ceremony.
"Both rob our children of the strength and stamina they need to succeed in school and in life, and that in turn robs our country of so much of their promise," said the first lady, who in February launched an ambitious project called "Let's Move," which aims to roll back childhood obesity in a generation.
The rate of childhood obesity tripled between 1980-1999 in the United States, with experts blaming it on lack of exercise and a diet heavy in fat and sugar.
Experts have warned that the current generation of Americans may be the first to live shorter, less healthy lives than their parents because of childhood obesity, which often continues into adulthood and leaves a person more susceptible to developing conditions such as hypertension and diabetes.
A study released in September found that medical costs for obese children amount to 14.3 billion dollars annually.



2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Imma Sayn Fri Dec 17, 2010 10:48 am PST Report Abuse
Like anything else.....it's school fault so let's let the government take over and fix it...When i went to school, your mom fixed your lunch.....today moms don't do anything including being moms....Just say'n
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1You Can't Fix Stupid Wed Dec 15, 2010 08:10 am PST Report Abuse
OK, first off, if the first ho would have been paying attention, it's NOT what they eat, it's that they don't burn it off. The funding for Physical Education is almost NILL, but they want to spend how much on food? It's a joke, another lesson in financial proctology.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Dollar In Decline Wed Dec 15, 2010 08:09 am PST Report Abuse
Michelle, teach parents how to keep their children home when very ill. Why the food? Kids at school get more sick from others than the food!!!!!With your salad bar sense, even more will get sick you sicko!!!!
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Jack Wed Dec 15, 2010 08:08 am PST Report Abuse
Making sure children get nutritional food? Hell of a crime.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2John Wed Dec 15, 2010 06:28 am PST Report Abuse
jesus this guy spends a few billion every day.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2... Wed Dec 15, 2010 05:50 am PST Report Abuse
ANd are these fat kids going to be "weighed" at the beginning of the school year??? ANd is there anyting in this bill that says IF they are still overweight that the program will be scrapped????.....what a joke.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Derek Wed Dec 15, 2010 03:35 am PST Report Abuse
Fight childhood hunger and obesity? Ok, how many starving kids have you ever known? Besides, kids are always hungry. Three squares a day is not that hard to provide. Parents are just irresponsible these days. On the other hand, I work in healthcare and many elderly people are hungry. Most can't afford food and some just forget to eat. Elderly neglect is a serious problem, but "oh the children."
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Larry P Tue Dec 14, 2010 10:52 pm PST Report Abuse
Seriously folks do you think one meal a day is going to do anything.Good food , is out of reach for a lot of americans today.People are into feeling full and taste.If I go to a super market and buy healthy food and snacks than I cannot afford the gas to cook them, or electric, whichever .Cold food get's old quick.If our government wants to control what we eat on food stamps than that can be done easy enough.But making kids that are addicted to fat and caffene go eight hours or longer without it will just cause withdraw discomfort.Not a fun place to be.So I applaud the motives , but let's get real.Give the kids , meat and potatos and a coke, o yeah and some corn or pea's applesauce .for good measure.just saying.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Dba Tue Dec 14, 2010 10:36 pm PST Report Abuse
I went to school in England for a few months in junior high/middle school. Not only were the lessons more advanced but they served a hot meal for lunch/dinner. The food was healthy and delicious and they didn't give napkins to the children because they all knew how to eat with a knife and fork. They didn't serve finger foods like hamburgers and pizza. We were served steak and potatoes with veggies, for example. I haven't hear about that country going broke for feeding their children in school. 

What's wrong with wanting to take care of our young? Making sure we are healthy will ensure a stronger work force and stronger military. Stronger minds create better sh!#. Innovative thinkers come from healthy minds not brains fed with junk food, fast food, processed food, or genetically altered food.

Subsidize Organic farms! Pass a bill requiring schools to teach children about growing healthy foods and cooking healthy meals. Then the students can teach their parents how to eat to live!
Bottom line is we need to re-work our schools all the way around. Nutrition is a great place to start. Let's go from there and crank it up a few notches. Next work on science, math and language. Then we can bring phys. ed. back to the schools along with music and art.
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Impartial Observer Tue Dec 14, 2010 09:00 pm PST Report Abuse
Under the new Obama Comprehensive Health Plan, everyone's food intake will be monitored using a "food-use-card-", or FUC You and Obama will immediately know if you are over-eating.