Neb. judge tosses illegal immigrant tuition suit

By TIMBERLY ROSS, Associated Press – Fri Dec 17, 4:39 pm ET
OMAHA, Neb. – A Nebraska judge threw out a lawsuit Friday challenging a state law that allows some illegal immigrants to pay in-state college tuition.
Jefferson County District Judge Paul Korslund ruled the six Nebraskans who claimed their taxes were being spent in violation of federal law should have first gone to the federal government and could renew the challenge in state court if the federal government declines to act.
The plaintiffs' attorney, Kris Kobach, called the dismissal "a bump in the road" and said he wasn't sure whether he would appeal the judge's dismissal or ask the Department of Homeland Security to intervene.
"The case is far from over," said Kobach, the recently elected Kansas secretary of state who has led litigation in other states targeting illegal immigration.
The lawsuit filed in January claimed that taxes from the Fairbury residents were being used to support the state's immigration-tuition law in violation of federal law. The lawsuit named the University of Nebraska Board of Regents and other state college boards as defendants and asked the judge to prevent school officials from following the law.
University attorney Joel Pedersen agreed that the dismissal left open potential further litigation but declined to speculate how the plaintiffs will proceed.
The state law passed in 2005 says students whose parents brought them to the U.S. illegally may pay the lower in-state tuition fees, as long as they graduated from Nebraska high schools, lived in the state for at least three years and are pursuing or promise to pursue legal status. The rules for residency requirements and nonresident tuition fees are governed by state law.
Opponents of the law say it is unfair to legal residents and conflicts with both the U.S. Constitution and a 1996 federal law that prohibits higher education institutions giving benefits to illegal immigrants without offering the same break to U.S. citizens.
In-state tuition can be significantly cheaper than fees for out-of-state residents. For example, undergraduate tuition at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln is about $6,000 per year for in-state students and $17,650 for those from out of state.
Kobach led a similar lawsuit in California, where the state Supreme Court ruled last month that illegal immigrants are entitled to the same tuition breaks offered to in-state high school students to attend public colleges and universities. Kobach, who represented a group of U.S. students seeking to invalidate the California law, has said he would appeal that decision to the U.S. Supreme Court.
The California Legislature passed the measure in 2001 that allowed any student, regardless of immigration status, who attended a California high school for at least three years and graduated to qualify for in-state tuition at the state's colleges and universities. In-state tuition saves each state college student about $11,000 a year and each University of California student about $23,000 a year.
Several other states, including New York and Texas, have similar laws.
___
Online:
U.S. District Court, Nebraska: http://www.ned.uscourts.gov/cmecf/
University of Nebraska: http://nebraska.edu/


1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Cannibal 3 hours ago Report Abuse
they have money for college and money to come here legal. deport them!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Slim Shady 7 hours ago Report Abuse
If they knew these people were ILLEGALS, what the heck are they still doing in the country ?????
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Myown 7 hours ago Report Abuse
Key here "brought them to the U.S. illegally" they should have NO rights until they comply with all the guidelines.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1My Clone Did It Not Me 17 hours ago Report Abuse
Wow that is messed up
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Firefighter 32 Yrs 18 hours ago Report Abuse
sell hunting license to hunt illegals and they will run back to mexico. Don't like cooking them, too greasy.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Cheluzal 20 hours ago Report Abuse
I just don't get why the word "illegal" carries no meaning for this one particular offense. I'm convinced the US gov't does not want these people out of here. Heck, even LEGAL immigrants or citizens I know want them out because they give legals a bad rep.
Reply
 
5Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Not Afraid Of You! Sun Dec 19, 2010 12:26 pm PST Report Abuse
why will the govornment not enforce the laws regarding illegal aliens.??
It's all about votes people.Soon more people will vote to uphold these laws and the tides will turn in our favor. America for Americans!!!
we have such diversity allready to be honest, just keep who we have legaly and we still have our "melting pot" the liberals speak so highly of) and we need to round up the muslims who are here for ONLY their gain and no harm us now until they can take over (like in Europe thats happinging now and we are next in their sights!!!!!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.5Melissa Sun Dec 19, 2010 10:47 am PST Report Abuse
You know, it is depressing, particularly at this time of year, to hear such blank, knee-jerk responses to such a complicated situation. In many cases on these boards, people criticize and outright judge other people for not doing the hard thing and doing whatever it takes to make a better life for their family. The reality is, that is what people coming to the U.S. are doing. Would they like to do it legally? In many, many cases, yes they would. The reality is that there are very few positions available for someone coming from Mexico, particuarly someone without a special skill. So, either they stay where they are, where the economy has been much worse than ours for a long time, and watch their kids have zero opportunities, or they move to the U.S. and take some of the worst jobs out there so their kids have a chance.

In any other case, seems like these parents might be given a little credit. --I ask you , if you were in that position, what would you do? 

Regardless of what you think of the parents, the children had no choice in the matter, and many have lived in the U.S. as long as they can remember. Punishing them may make us feel better, but does it really help the situation?
Replies (3)
 
7Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Plato232425 Sat Dec 18, 2010 09:01 am PST Report Abuse
This is forced philanthropy.

And it is funded by taxpayers.

Why doesn't BIll Gates step up and foot the bill?
Reply
 
15Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Sarafina Sat Dec 18, 2010 07:53 am PST Report Abuse
They shouldn't even be in this country, why are they going to school here? deport them and their parents who illegally snuck in this country. Why is this even something that needed concideration?