Obama salutes spirit of compromise, signs tax bill

By JIM KUHNHENN, Associated Press – Sat Dec 18, 5:46 am ET
WASHINGTON – President Barack Obama signed into law a huge, holiday-season tax bill extending cuts for all Americans on Friday, saluting a new spirit of political compromise as Republicans applauded and liberals seethed. The benefits range from tax cuts for millionaires and the middle class to longer-term help for the jobless.
The most significant tax legislation in nearly a decade will avert big increases that would have hit millions of people starting in two weeks on New Year's Day. Declared Obama: "We are here with some good news for the American people this holiday season."
"This is progress and that's what they sent us here to achieve," Obama said as a rare bipartisan assembly of lawmakers looked on at the White House.
The package retains Bush-era tax rates for all taxpayers, including the wealthiest Americans, a provision Obama and congressional liberals opposed. It also offers 13 months of extended benefits to the unemployed and attempts to stimulate the economy with a Social Security payroll tax cut for all workers.
At a cost of $858 billion over two years, the deal contains provisions dear to both Democrats and Republicans. It represents the most money that Obama was likely to have been able to dedicate over the next year to the slowly recovering economy. Yet it also increases the federal deficit at a time when the country is growing increasingly anxious about the red ink.
Dramatic both as an economic and a political accomplishment, the agreement sets the stage for Obama's new relationship with Congress in the aftermath of a midterm election wave that devastated Democrats and stripped them of control of the House.
Obama called for maintaining the spirit of cooperation, declaring he was hopeful "that we might refresh the American people's faith in the capability of their leaders to govern in challenging times."
He conceded that the White House and Congress face a difficult challenge when it comes to controlling the deficit and tackling the nation's debt.
"In some ways this was easier than some of the tougher choices we're going to have to make next year," he said.
Conspicuous by their absence at the ceremony were House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., a reflection of the sharply divided sentiment about the bill in the Democratic caucus.
For Obama, the deal completes the biggest agenda item he has placed before Congress during the postelection lame duck session. In addition, the White House is increasingly optimistic that he will also win Senate ratification of a nuclear arms deal with Russia and the repeal of the military's ban on openly gay service members.
Obama, who is delaying his vacation to Hawaii until Congress completes its work, now is expecting to leave Washington as early as next Wednesday, said spokesman Robert Gibbs.
Friday's bill signing marked a remarkably swift conclusion to a bargain struck 11 days ago between the White House and Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky.
To complete the deal, Obama set aside his vow to extend tax cuts only for the middle class and lower wage earners. The measure also enacts an estate tax that is more generous to the wealthy than Obama had sought.
Since his campaign for president in 2008, Obama has said income tax rates should rise for single taxpayers with gross incomes over $200,000 and married couples with incomes over $250,000. His first budget, submitted a year ago, included plans for those tax hikes.
The extended tax cuts in the negotiated package include rates lower than those that would have gone into effect Jan. 1, a $1,000-per-child tax credit, tax breaks for college students and lower taxes on capital gains and dividends. The bill also extends through 2011, a series of business tax breaks designed to encourage investment that expired at the end of 2009.
Social Security taxes would be cut by nearly a third, from 6.2 percent to 4.2 percent, for this coming year. A worker making $50,000 would save $1,000; one making $100,000 would save $2,000.
But the payroll tax cut also means that workers will face an increase in 2012 if the full 6.2 percent rate is restored. And by scheduling President George W. Bush's 2001 and 2003 tax rates to expire in two years, the law ensures that taxes will be a top issue in the 2012 presidential election.
The tax code is filled with dozens of cuts that expire each year, and not all of them made it into the package. Sen. Max Baucus, D-Mont., tried to include a property tax deduction for people who don't itemize, but it was left out. The provision would have saved taxpayers about $1.5 billion a year.
Republicans boasted that their success in extending tax cuts for all was a sign of things to come.
"The American people are seeing change here in Washington; they can expect more in the new year," said McConnell, who was singled out for praise by Obama and shook hands with the president after the signing.
Indeed, McConnell was directed to stand right next to the presidential desk where Obama was signing the bill, ensuring he would be prominent in the photos.
Liberals, unable to alter the plan, were left bristling. They argued Obama should have bargained harder, and they especially objected to the new estate tax, which will allow the first $10 million of a couple's estate to pass to heirs without taxation. The balance would be subject to a 35 percent tax rate.
Obama signed the bill less than half an hour after meeting with a dozen labor leaders, some of whom were vocal critics of the agreement. A day before the session, AFL-CIO president Richard Trumka praised the union-sought jobless benefits but said passage of the legislation came "at a terrible price."
Rep. Anthony Weiner, D-N.Y., another critic of the bill, said Obama and lawmakers will face enormous election-year pressure in 2012 to extend the cuts again or make them permanent. Weiner said the Republicans turned out to be "better poker players" than Obama.
Obama conceded that the prospect of tax increases on all taxpayers helped prod an agreement that otherwise would have been difficult, if not impossible to achieve.
What's more, Obama's praise for Republicans, and his heralding of an overdue bipartisan moment in Washington, came after he himself spent the better part of 2010 bashing the GOP leadership as an obstructionist party of no.
The White House cautioned Republicans that Obama was not going to extend his hand in every case. "There will be times when we will draw the line and have big fights," Gibbs said.
____
Associated Press Writer Ben Feller contributed to this report.


1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Liwei 5 hours ago Report Abuse
There is no real leader in charge right now that I can see. Everybody is just counting days and kick cans down the road. Adding deficit is so easy comparing with taking a painful solution. I suspected this when the president took the oath, he just proved that he is the very one as suspected, not a true leader.
Reality will take charge sooner or later, without real leader to take preventive measure, it will be doubly painful. I think that there will be hanger, riot, possibly worse things.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Shadow 7 hours ago Report Abuse
Lack of regulations (or lack of enforcing existing ones) is what allowed all the 'free-market fundamentalists' to destroy the economy. Now we will have 'no regulations' Ron Paul running a committee in the House.

Collective amnesia is the one thing all Americans seems to suffer from.
Replies (1)
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Kelly 8 hours ago Report Abuse
only a democrat would have to seek cover because his administration let people keep more of their hard earned money. everyone deserves a tax break now. we need to lower them more.
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Everett 8 hours ago Report Abuse
@Ron: Thank you for confirming that I was correct. 

The relevant change occurred in 2003 (a 0.5% cut does virtually nothing). 

After that, revenues started going up. 

Tax cuts stimulate economic growth, and cause increased revenues in subsequent years. 

Which would you rather have. $10K earning 5%, or $5K earning 10%? 

It depends upon the duration. 

In the short run, the $10K is worth more. However, if I am going to let the money compound until retirement, the $5K at 10% will eventually be worth far more. 

Cuts to the top tax rate increase the RATE of growth, 
which is the most important aspect in the long run.
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Don't Care Anymore 8 hours ago Report Abuse
Why does everyone think that the rich should pay more than the next person,If you are so jealous of them,get your lazy @#$% out in the real world and make your own,you whinning lazy don't want to earn it.give me yours,cry babies.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0RON 9 hours ago Report Abuse
Everett,
2000 the top tax rate was 39.6
2001....39.1
2002....38.6
2003....35

Do your research, or check your return, if you are in that tax bracket ha, ha.
Replies (1)
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Ace 10 hours ago Report Abuse
Tax everyone at a flat 15% reagrdless of income level and dismantle the IRS.
Replies (4)
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Georgiaguy777 20 hours ago Report Abuse
Eliminate the Estate Tax-permanently!!! It is evil and un-American to confiscate peoples' wealth upon their death.

Cut government spending to whatever level is necessary-entitlements and Medicare included-to balance the budget.

Higher taxes=less freedom and prosperity. Cut, slash and chop the federal budget to whatever level is necessary to balance the budget. No higher taxes-not today, tomorrow, or forever.

My poor parents have worked their entire lives to build a modest nestegg of $4.0 million. The vicious and evil communists running the government want to call them "rich" so they can punish and steal these poor peoples' money.

Democrats are theives and liars, and wish to bring misery and unhappiness to ordinary peoples' lives so they can have their socialist utopia.

May God cast them into Hell at the end of time.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Sartistic 23 hours ago Report Abuse
" liberals argued vehemently it included an unforgivable giveaway to the rich" Typical... Giveaway?? To let someone keep more of their own money?.. Disgusting to see the mentality of the idiots we booted out. Hope the door hits them in the a$$ on the way out in January.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Whokilledkenny 23 hours ago Report Abuse
then should we (cut taxes again) in order to go further in debt?
@#$%
If we didn't spend money that we didn't have in the first place; we would be in debt. Lets corral spending first! Your statement really doesn't make sense. Every good astute person, company and successful business works on a budget. Actually meeting those budget goals.
You do not spend money you don't have unless your irresponsible.