Mon Dec 20, 1:19 pm ET
Hooters responds to NOW complaint: Our sex appeal is ‘wholesome’
By Liz Goodwin

Busty restaurant chain Hooters is hitting back against a women's group that says the chain is breaking the law by serving children.
Hooters' brand of sex appeal is "wholesome" and all-American, and thus compatible with a child clientele, according to a statement by the company's marketing vice president, Mike McNeil.
"Hooters Girls are sexy and vivacious. The element of sex appeal is certainly prevalent in our restaurants, and is the essence of the Hooters experience, but the Hooters brand of sex appeal is wholesome and that of the all-American cheerleader, not a seedy strip club," said McNeil. "It is time for NOW to accept the fact that the public likes Hooters and there is really nothing they can do about it. Hooters is no more in violation of California's adult entertainment codes than the Sports Illustrated swimsuit edition is. However, guys can't do that job, either."
The National Organization for Women argues that the restaurant is violating California law by classifying itself as "adult entertainment" but allowing children to patronize its restaurants. The "adult" classification allows Hooters to hire primarily young and attractive women without worry of discrimination lawsuits.
McNeil says that authorities have not contacted the restaurant chain about the complains and that the publicity has boosted sales in the past 24 hours.
(Screenshot of $12.95 baby romper via Hooters.com)

Joel 1 hour ago Report Abuse
The Dallas Cowboy cheerleaders have been dressing this way for decades and children go to the games. People were watching women dressed this way in Roller Derby back in the 70's. Is it really wrong to show an in shape body in America these days? If you are offended and don't want your children to see this, then don't go and don't take your children. The waitresses are not being forced to work there. Leave it alone and focus on more important women's rights issues.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0 1 hour ago Report Abuse
When The Food Is Terrible And The Beer Is Over Priced! They Have To Have A Gimmick. And It's Very
Harmless! Who Cares If You Don't Like It, Don't Go! You Have A Choice. I Use My Choice And Don't Go. Because Of The Food And Drink's Grade D-