At least five killed in Iran quake

By Parisa Hafezi – 1 hr 3 mins ago
TEHRAN (Reuters) – At least five people were killed in an earthquake of 6.5 magnitude that jolted southeastern Iran on Monday, damaging buildings in outlying mountainous areas, the region's governor said.
"So far five people have been killed. A higher number of casualties is possible because of the vast scale of the damage," Esmail Najjar, governor of Iran's Kerman province, center of the quake, told Reuters.
State television said at least three villages had been destroyed. "Hundreds of people are trapped under the rubble," the semi-official Mehr news agency quoted a local official as saying.
The U.S. Geological Survey put the quake's magnitude at 6.3. The official IRNA news agency said nine aftershocks had hit since the main quake, including one of 5 magnitude. Telephone lines had been cut.
Mohammad Javad Kamyab, an employee of Kerman province governor's office, told Reuters there were 30 villages in the quake-hit area.
"These villages are not heavily populated...We are not expecting a high death toll and so far 25 people have been injured," he said.
Another local official said access to the damaged villages "was very difficult."
"Rescue teams have been dispatched to the quake-hit area ... and are communicating via walkie-talkies," Hossein Baqeri, head of Iran's National Crisis Management unit, told state television.
The semi-official Fars news agency said the quake was also felt in the southeastern province of Sistan-Baluchestan, which borders Afghanistan and Pakistan.
"Many people left their houses in the city of Zahedan ... It was also felt in the towns of Bam, Khash and Iranshahr," Fars reported.
Ali Reza, a resident of Bam, told Reuters by telephone: "There was no damage in the city of Bam but we felt the quake."
The province of Kerman is highly prone to earthquakes. Some 31,000 people were killed when an earthquake razed Bam in 2003.
Kerman is not one of the oil-producing regions of Iran, the world's fourth-biggest crude exporter. Iran is criss-crossed by major faultlines and is frequently hit by earthquakes.
In 2008 a magnitude 6.1 quake struck the southern port of Bandar Abbas, killing at least seven people and injuring 40.
An official in the governor's office of Kerman province told Reuters by telephone: "The quake-hit area is a deserted area."
State television, quoting an unnamed local Red Crescent official, said: "In some rural parts of the region ... the quake has caused heavy damage to buildings, especially in Hosseinabad village, where the houses were made of earthen bricks."
(Additional reporting by Hossein Jaseb; writing by Parisa Hafezi; editing by Philippa Fletcher)


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Sal Taxem 2 minutes ago Report Abuse
Federal Government Tax Revenues $2 TRILLION
Federal Government Expenditures $3 TRILLION

No more taxes...PLEASE!

Liquor Tax
Luxury Tax
Excise Taxes
Property Tax
Cigarette Tax
Medicare Tax
Inventory Tax
Car Rental Tax
Real Estate Tax
Well Permit Tax
Fuel Permit Tax
Inheritance Tax
Road Usage Tax
State Income Tax
Food License Tax
Vehicle Sales Tax

Want to read something unbelievable?

G00GLE search THE CASHa TEACHER then select the first link. Go and check out the "PENNY STOCKS" page first and then the "STOCKS" page to learn what the rich do not want us all to know??? It is our right to have some of this wealth!e5
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ēqualizer 14 minutes ago Report Abuse
It's a shame that none of the nuclear reactors were hit.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Anthony 19 minutes ago Report Abuse
Sounds like another HAARP hit.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Federico 29 minutes ago Report Abuse
Quick!, cover all those girls more, they are causing the quakes.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ēqualizer 29 minutes ago Report Abuse
I guess that even Allah has Mondays. I'm sure next time he'll make certain that more people die.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0NICKNICK 40 minutes ago Report Abuse
Maybe God will cause te earth to open up and swallow that entire region......Gods wrath is coming !!!!!!! on all of us.......
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Red Neck 42 minutes ago Report Abuse
U.S. will send billions, food, and every thing else they ask for.
just wonder when our goverment will stop kissing those third
world countries bottoms.
Replies (1)
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Bluepeahen 46 minutes ago Report Abuse
Dear Iran, 
As you probably know by now, I am angry. Today it was only a 6.5 but if you don't change your ways, the times of trouble will increase. 
Stop threatening My people, Israel. Stop killing My Christians, too. 
And please stop calling Me Allah. My name is Yahweh, the Great I Am. 

And while I have your attention, stop supressing your people. And stop lying to them. 
I never asked for Jihad, Fatah or any other of your lame-brain ideas. 
Mind your own business for once in your life. I'll take care of the rest Myself. 

Oh, and stop insulting My Son. He isn't a Prophet, He is the Second Person of Our Trinity. 
His birthday celebration is this week. Keep it peaceful. 
Love, 
God
Replies (1)
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ana2rosa2003 50 minutes ago Report Abuse
I'm sure President "I'm In The Mood For Jihad" Ahmadinejad will find a way to blame the US and Israel for this.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Mark 50 minutes ago Report Abuse
It must be Mossad?