Slain American tourist had deep ties to Israel

By AMY TEIBEL, Associated Press – Mon Dec 20, 2:11 pm ET
JERUSALEM – An American tourist killed in a forest outside Jerusalem had deep spiritual ties to Israel through her involvement with an evangelical ministry that promotes Christianity among Jews.
Kristine Luken, who was in her mid-40s, was stabbed to death Saturday while hiking with a friend. Israeli police had originally identified her as Christine Logan.
Luken was involved with the "Church's Ministry among Jewish people," first in the U.S., then in England, where she became a ministry staffer. The church is active in Israel.
On the CMJ American web site, Luken quoted inspirational poet Minnie Louise Haskins' words, "Go into the darkness and put your hand into the Hand of God. That shall be to you better than light and safer than a known way."
A 2007 study tour in Israel, "Walking with Jesus in his Jewish world," brought Luken to the church, she wrote on the site.
She and Kaye Susan Wilson, a naturalized Israeli from the U.K., became friends on a study tour to Poland earlier this year, the Rev. David Pileggi of CMJ's Christ Church in Jerusalem said Monday. Luken, an avid hiker, and Wilson, a professional tour guide, decided to go hiking together in Israel during Luken's Christmas holiday, he said.
On Saturday, the two headed for the wooded hills. Wilson told Israeli reporters from her hospital bed Sunday that she and Luken were attacked by two Arab men with what looked like a bread knife.
She said she escaped to a nearby road after pretending to be dead. Luken's body, hands bound and bearing multiple stab wounds, was discovered Sunday in the forest.
Police spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said authorities were treating the attack as politically motivated, while not ruling out that it could have been criminal.
The forest is inside Israel but close to the border with the West Bank and the Palestinian villages of Husan and Wadi Fukin.
No suspects have been detained. There was no claim of responsibility, which suggests that the assault, even if politically motivated, was likely the work of individuals and not a militant group.
Don Stanley of the church's head office in Israel said the family did not want Luken's home town disclosed.
The ministry issued a statement on its British website saying it was"deeply shocked" by Luken's violent death.
"She had a beautiful and gentle spirit as well as a strong and vibrant faith," the statement read. "It is a tragedy that such a lively, caring and faith filled person should have been struck down in such a way. We are praying for her friends and family at this tragic time. However, CMJ will continue to share the gospel with the Jewish people and to work for forgiveness and reconciliation in Israel."


1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Hand Of God 3 minutes ago Report Abuse
Jeruselam must be nuked so that NO ONE can have it
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Pook 8 minutes ago Report Abuse
How's life bigots?
Frustrating?
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4AFANDI BASHA 15 minutes ago Report Abuse
a torrid lesbian affair and a very jealous partner,lets all revel in the streets of telaviv,pretty soon bistros with signs hanging up side down in east jerusalem,thats gonna go over real well rabbi get the donkeys ready.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Tipiklju 17 minutes ago Report Abuse
from another yooohoo article: Kidnapped Mexican politician freed after 7 months

now imagine if a isrealhellie was captured for a day or two - we would have 24/7 coverage of it.

keep it in perpesctive people

dont believe the hype
Replies (1)
 
7Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.8Tipiklju 23 minutes ago Report Abuse
...another zionist propaganda piece...nice try you rats
Replies (1)
 
7Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3CG 26 minutes ago Report Abuse
How unbelievably sad. Brave woman to escape like that. I hope they find and punish Logan's murderers--what kind of scum ties a woman up and then murders her? Filth.
Replies (2)
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.7Tipiklju 26 minutes ago Report Abuse
iz real-hell has no heart, no soul, no shame

is this what the land of the 'chosen' has come to? you teach hatred to your youngens and they grow up to be psychopaths - - an entire nation built on hatred. al least there are some decent muslims, cant say the same about izrealhellies
Replies (3)
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Tipiklju 28 minutes ago Report Abuse
Saturday, December 18, 2010
from a previous poster:

Palestinian shepherd: Israeli settlers burned sheep alive
Ma’an - A farmer said he watched a group of settlers in the northern West Bank gather his sheep and set them on fire Saturday afternoon.

When he returned to the area, he told officials, he found 12 sheep burned alive, five with severe burns and two others that were only lightly burned. "I've lost at least $12,000," he said, calling the act abominable.
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Andrew Jackson 30 minutes ago Report Abuse
Anyone interested should check out ynet, and find the article. It appears that the Israeli Police don't believe her story about being attacked by Arabs.
Reply
 
7Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.6Tipiklju 33 minutes ago Report Abuse
Why do my tax dollars go to Israel?