Iran rejects Hariri tribunal verdict in advance

By ALI AKBAR DAREINI, Associated Press – Mon Dec 20, 3:30 pm ET
TEHRAN, Iran – Iran's supreme leader has rejected any ruling by a U.N.-backed tribunal investigating the 2005 assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri even before the verdict has been issued.
The tribunal based in the Netherlands is expected to imminently indict members of Lebanon's Hezbollah — one of Iran's major allies in the Middle East. The Shiite militant group controls a military force that is more powerful than Lebanon's national army and it is also part of the country's fragile governing coalition.
"This tribunal is a rubber stamp court," said Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who has the final say on all state matters in Iran. "Any verdict it may issue is null and void," state television quoted him as saying on Monday. "I hope the influential parties involved in Lebanon will act based on wisdom and logic so that this issue doesn't turn into a problem."
He spoke during a meeting with Qatar's Emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani Monday, state television reported.
In Washington, State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said the U.S. would not attempt to influence the decision of the tribunal. Referring to the Iranian position, he said, "We regret that there are many in the region who have chosen to politicize the work of the tribunal."
Hariri, a Sunni Muslim, was Lebanon's most prominent politician in the years after the 1975-1990 civil war. He and 22 other people were killed by a truck bomb on Feb. 14, 2005. At the time, he was trying to limit the influence of Syria — another Iran and Hezbollah ally — in Lebanon.
Lebanon's fragile government has been struggling ahead of the expected indictments by the tribunal. Speculation that Hezbollah members will be indicted has fueled fears of a new political crisis and violence in Lebanon, and raised concerns over what Iran might do.
During a visit to Iran last month, Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri expressed concerns for stability in the Middle East and sought Iran's support for his efforts to keep Lebanon stable amid tensions over the U.N. probe into the assassination of his father.
Hezbollah leader Sheik Hassan Nasrallah has said he expects members of his group to be indicted, but has accused the court of bias. The group has fiercely denied any role in the killing, and Nasrallah has said the group "will cut off the hand" of anyone who tries to arrest any of its members.
Iran, whose ties to Hezbollah date back nearly 30 years, allegedly funds the militant group to the tune of millions of dollars a year and is suspected of supplying much of its arsenal.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Snuggy 12 minutes ago Report Abuse
Iran is upset because the " West & Israel " aren't the focus of the tribunal. 
As though ANY internal Islamic problems just don't exist. The threats continue as always, and Iran's opinion is like a fart in the wind, it stinks but is soon gone with the wind.

BTW, any " cutting off of hands " will be followed by a bare butt spanking of those outsiders.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ptiza Govorun 28 minutes ago Report Abuse
- Men occasionally stumble over the truth, but most of them pick themselves up and hurry off as if nothing ever happened.
Sir Winston Churchill
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Man Of The World 1 hour ago Report Abuse
Feelin guilty about something?
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2The 1 1 hour ago Report Abuse
Live with it boys! Those europian getto boys who think they are so good, got thier END F real good by 2500 of those hazbolah. You are finished.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1John 2 hours ago Report Abuse
Who cares what the crackpot has to say. He knows Hamas did it with the help of Iran.
Reply
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Warren 3 hours ago Report Abuse
Hey Iran, the assassination of Harari happened in his own country formerly known as Lebanon. You have no right to reject the findings before or after they come out you arrogant mullahs. And by the way, what happened to your absurd evidence that the Mossad was behind the murders, guess the investigators had a good laugh on that one.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Templar 3 hours ago Report Abuse
There was a murder, cold blooded murder, the murderer-s will be exposed regardless.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Pook 3 hours ago Report Abuse
Let's see...

Looking in my Zionist crystal ball, I see Hezballah destorying Lebanon over this, and once the destruction is almost complete, the Lebanese still left standing asking Israel to come in and kick some @ss but instead the UN decides to let someone else do the kicking.

In the meantime, the Iranian regime is on the brink of civil war and the mullah are practicing their sway on those poles they love to hang gays and women in love.

Zionists love the Lebanese and Persian people too, among others.
Replies (2)
 
8Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Doug Buckeye 3 hours ago Report Abuse
Speaking out before the results are announced is a classic "show of hand" in this case shows guilt!

Bravo Iran as if we expected different findings
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Mohammed Sucksass 3 hours ago Report Abuse
Qatar's Emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani= what I see
Quatro's Emu Shieet Heaadd been K@#$%in All-Tchildren