Spanish police recover art stolen from warehouse

– Mon Dec 20, 9:13 am ET
MADRID – Spanish police say they have recovered artworks including pieces by Picasso, Colombian artist Fernando Botero and Spanish sculptor Eduardo Chillida that were stolen from a Madrid warehouse.
Specialized Crimes unit chief Dionisio Martin said Monday the art was found in a stolen truck in an industrial area on Madrid's southern outskirts.
The pieces, recovered Saturday, had a total value of some euro5 million ($6.5 million), Martin said.
He said 35 pieces were stolen and one remains missing. No arrests have been made so far.
Martin said the thieves had tried to sell one of Chillida's metal sculptures to a scrap dealer.
The works were stolen on Nov. 27 by thieves who broke into the warehouse and stole a vehicle containing them.



0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0MM 3 hours ago Report Abuse
Why would you steal something that means so much to your country's history.
If you need money, rob a @#$% bank instead.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Howard Johnson 4 hours ago Report Abuse
Is that where i left that? i thought i put it in the dumpster.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Bob S 4 hours ago Report Abuse
the idiots have millions in their posession and are trying to sell to a scrap dealer for pennies on tne dollar
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Joe One 6 hours ago Report Abuse
Sounds like a setup to me.
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Old Geezer 6 hours ago Report Abuse
Send in Hart to Hart! Or Inspector Clouseau!
Replies (1)
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Mike 7 hours ago Report Abuse
All high priced art work should be required to be kept under state of the are security systems. They should have to follow a specific protocol for transport.
Replies (1)
 
11Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.27George 8 hours ago Report Abuse
I have seen the work of Picasso. I wouldn't give 50 cents for any of his works. A kindergartener with fingerpaints can do much better. Not every book that is published is worth reading. Not every movie released is worth seeing. Not every piece of music written is worth the listening. Certainly, not every thing painted is art.
Replies (10)
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.10Toni
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.11Khaos Odensland
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Dan S Thu Dec 02, 2010 10:10 am PST Report Abuse
When they try to sell them...find them and shoot them....best deterent ever!