Christmas chaos as snow snarls European travel

by Danny Kemp – 2 hrs 4 mins ago
LONDON (AFP) – Thousands of angry travellers struggled Monday to get home for Christmas as snow and ice caused fresh chaos at European airports and paralysed roads and railways across the frozen continent.
International hubs London, Paris, Frankfurt, Amsterdam and Brussels tried to clear a backlog of passengers forced to sleep on terminal floors for up to three days as they sought to reach their destinations by the end of the week.
Authorities in Frankfurt sent in clowns in a bid to cheer up travellers, but fury mounted in Britain, especially at Heathrow where severe disruption reigned despite the last major snowfall having been on Saturday.
"I am ashamed to be British," Marian Perkins, 65, who was hoping to fly to Australia to see her new grandson for the first time, told AFP.
"It's disgusting. We are here in the cold with the same clothes since Friday, because we don't carry winter clothes when we go to Australia," she said.
Heathrow's Terminal 3 had been turned into a makeshift camp with exhausted passengers crashed out on temporary mattresses as money and patience wore thin at the world's busiest international airport.
American musician Giovanni Bet, 22, who was trying to get back to Chicago after a tour, said: "We were here last night. It was like a shanty camp with people sleeping on the floor."
The airport warned travellers to anticipate chaos "potentially beyond Christmas Day". It cut flights to a third until 0600 GMT Wednesday in a bid to get diverted jets and crew back to their normal positions.
British Airways meanwhile asked passengers travelling to or from Heathrow up until December 24 to switch their flight to another date or cancel it in return for a refund.
As Britain was hit by more heavy snow and temperatures plummeted again, London's Gatwick airport announced it was grounding all flights until early Tuesday.
"Sorry. No outbound flights from Gatwick until 6am [0600 GMT] Tuesday 21st December because of heavy snow," the airport said on microblogging site Twitter.
Amid mounting criticism of the travel chaos, British airport operator BAA defended its handling of the crisis.
Chief executive Colin Matthews said Heathrow had to bring in earthmoving equipment and 50 trucks to remove the snow. "I cannot remember in my lifetime any episode of cold and snow remotely like today," he said.
Eurostar, which operates high-speed passenger trains linking London with Paris and Brussels, also faced chaos.
Five-hour queues stretched around the block in freezing weather from London's St Pancras station as Eurostar cancelled some services and operated speed restrictions on trains that did run, nearly doubling some journey times.
"We started queuing yesterday, we were here until seven o'clock and then... we took a hotel and now we have been waiting for an hour already today," Anne-Sophie Prevost, a 24-year-old bank worker from France, told AFP.
A brass band played at the station in an attempt to provide some Christmas spirit inside the imposing Gothic station.
Temperatures reached a record low in Northern Ireland, hitting minus 17.6 degrees Celsius (0.3 degrees Fahrenheit).
There were fresh snowfalls in France, hitting both Paris international airports, Charles de Gaulle and Orly, where three out of 10 flights were cancelled Monday.
"Air traffic at all airports in the Paris region is very disrupted," the civil aviation authority said.
At Charles de Gaulle, 3,000 people were forced to spend Sunday night in the terminals after 40 percent of flights were scrapped.
Late Monday, 100 soldiers were sent to the airport with 300 beds and 2,500 blankets as stranded travellers faced another night camped in terminals, local authorities said.
Authorities banned heavy trucks from the roads around Paris and many buses were cancelled in the region, the RATP Paris transport network said.
French railway operator SNCF handed out 12,000 ready meals and booked 500 hotel rooms in Paris for stranded passengers but said services were expected to be mostly back to normal for Christmas.
Frankfurt airport, Germany's busiest, resorted to clowns to keep stranded children entertained -- after the police were sent in, according to press reports, to calm some angry passengers.
The airport scrapped around 340 flights Monday -- mainly because others airports around Europe were closed -- after more than a thousand travellers spent the night on camp beds.
There was also disruption at Amsterdam-Schiphol airport and Brussels airport Monday.
In Italy, the bodies of two homeless people were found Monday, likely victims of the cold.


1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Brett 1 hour ago Report Abuse
darn that global warming
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Eric1 6 hours ago Report Abuse
AMAZING how many idiotic global warming 'non-believers' come on here to reveal their stupidity and ignorance. As you obviously don't know or understand, this is EXACTLY the kind of weather that has been PREDICTED would occur as a result of global warming. Understand? EXACTLY! And there is going to be a LOT MORE OF IT!!! Just look up 'Atlantic Conveyor' to find out WHY.....
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Jjjjjjjj 9 hours ago Report Abuse
enjoy the nice time with your family that is with you in the airports...you can do nothing about the weather...
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0 14 hours ago Report Abuse
Let it snow, let it snow, let it snow....
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1SHINOBI7 14 hours ago Report Abuse
CO2 is innocent, pure and immaculate against all allegations made by al gore and friends...
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Debpeg 15 hours ago Report Abuse
There's not a lot one can do about the weather. I live in aplace where it is dangerous to try to travel by any means. It is not the fault of the airlines or the trains, just a lousy time of year for trying to get from one place or another *even to work if you're lucky enough to have a job.*
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Egghead 16 hours ago Report Abuse
OH well, I guess they'll have to suffer and spend time with family alone. God Forbid.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Bob 17 hours ago Report Abuse
Gee !
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.5Gene 18 hours ago Report Abuse
Hope all you so called Global Warming/Climate Change experts are enjoying the beautiful winter weather in Europe right now. We're getting our a$$es frozen here in the US also.

If you idiots stuck to the claim of an impending mini ice age like your parents did back in the 70's, you'd actually have a credible point.

I'm sure you climate alarmists will spin some justification to blame these freezing temperatures on whatever cause you choose to name. Sooner or later, you'll find man cannot control the environment any more than he can predict it. Regardless, this planet's going to alter the climate the way it sees fit. Been doing so for 4.5 billion years. We've only been here 50,000.

I can't wait for Al Gore to spin this one. Oh, and I hope you all choke on the snow, or didn't you see it coming?
Replies (4)
 
5Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Obama 19 hours ago Report Abuse
Your global warming tax dollars at work for you.
Reply