Winter disruptions turn travel bitter and chaotic

By GREGORY KATZ, Associated Press – 2 mins ago
LONDON – The Christmas travel season turned angry and chaotic Monday as British officials struggled to clear snow and ice that paralyzed rail and air links and spawned cancellations and delays stranding thousands around the world.
More than 48 hours after Britain's last snowfall, some furious passengers with boarding passes for Monday flights were not even allowed into London's Heathrow Airport. Inside, piles of garbage grew and some people slept on terminal floors.
Other travelers waited in the cold for up to six hours to get inside London's St. Pancras train station, where they had to wait still longer for Eurostar trains to mainland Europe.
Chagrined British officials promised an inquiry into the failure to clear the remnants of a storm that dumped five inches over parts of England Saturday morning. Other European airports rebounded from weekend snowfall and resumed close to normal flight schedules by Monday.
"It can't be beyond the wit of man surely to find the shovels, the diggers, the snowplows or whatever it takes to clear the snow out from under the planes, to get the planes moving and to have more than one runway going," London Mayor Boris Johnson said as British Airways canceled its Monday short-haul schedule from Heathrow.
Forecasters have said Britain is experiencing some of the most severe winter weather in a century, with continued freezing temperatures and snowfall accumulations expected Monday afternoon and evening. Experts said the extreme winter weather may be related to climate change due to global warming. With a warmer climate, there's more moisture in the air, which makes storms including blizzards more intense.
Heathrow operator BAA said swings in temperature after the five-inch snowfall in one hour Saturday led to extensive ice buildup around aircraft on the ground. BAA said "every available" staff member and several hundred additional contractors were trying to get the airport moving again.
But BAA offered little hope of relief from travel purgatory, saying a maximum one-third of scheduled flights would be allowed to take off and land at Heathrow until at least 6 a.m. (0600 GMT, 1 a.m. EST) Wednesday. The British government approved night-flight operations at Heathrow in an effort to remove the backlog, but officials warned it may take until after Christmas to do so — and longer if more snow falls.
The capital's smaller airport, Gatwick, announced late Monday that there will be no outbound flights until Tuesday morning because more snow is expected.
At Heathrow's sprawling Terminal 5, tired and disgruntled passengers faced lengthy waits without much information as piles of garbage grew throughout the complex.
"The whole situation is horrible," said teenager Sophiya Bolkova, as she clutched her ticket home to Moscow after three days' delay. "We are very angry. People were just mean, rude, sleeping on the floor, babies sleeping on the floor, no information, no help, no money for hotels."
American Suzie Devoe, 20, spent two nights on the airport floor and was desperately trying to get back to Washington for Christmas.
"I just want to get home, I want to be with my family. But I'm being held in a horrible limbo," the Bristol University student said.
At St. Pancras, hundreds of frustrated travelers hoping to travel to France and Belgium by train stood in a line that wound through the station, around the outside of the huge building and several hundred yards (meters) down the road.
Many had been there for five hours or more, bundled up in parkas, scarves, gloves and hats against the chill, or clutching cups of tea and coffee from a Salvation Army van that had handed out 2,000 hot drinks since before dawn.
Train operator Eurostar broadcast loudspeaker announcements warning people not to travel unless their journey was "absolutely essential." Many said they were getting little other information. A spokeswoman said the delay was due to safety reasons, as trains traveling at high speeds in icy conditions can be damaged, but she promised good service on Tuesday.
Frankfurt airport, Germany's biggest, was clear of snow and ice but officials canceled about 300 of 1,340 flights because of problems elsewhere in Europe.
French civil aviation authorities, meanwhile, asked airlines to reduce their flights at the two main Paris airports by 30 percent.
The snow-related problems come near the end of a year filled with travel disruptions, including the April shutdown of much of Europe's airspace because of a plume of ash from a volcano eruption in Iceland.
___
Jill Lawless in London, Geir Moulson and Juergen Baetz in Berlin, Gabriele Steinhauser in Brussels, Elaine Ganley and Jeff Schaeffer in Paris and Karel Janicek in Prague contributed to this report.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Pinklady 2 minutes ago Report Abuse
I agree with Gene R. Why do people get themselves in those type of situations? They know VERY well how the weather is in this time of year, so I don't see why they get furious. 
I would visit my relatives in the summer or any other time during the year when the weather is much better. I'm so glad I'm Latin American, we don't have those type of situations, weather wise. :)
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Merry 3 minutes ago Report Abuse
Weather is weather, if it's natural or induced, just deal with it.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Buck-A-Toddy 3 minutes ago Report Abuse
I worked professionally in meteorology for 40 years from the scientific end, not the broadcast media... It does not take a scientist or even a climatologist to determine if the average temperatures are warmer now than they were when we started keeping records. Anyone can go to the weather records and determine for themselves what's happening to the temps. Whether or not any change is normal or manmade is a lot more difficult to determine. If you yank the political and economical bias out of the climatological algorythms, you might come up with some FACTS everyone could agree on.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Sarcasticone 5 minutes ago Report Abuse
You can't blame the British officials, they planned the cleanup based on global warming estimates. The snow was supposed to stop falling in Britain in 2000! OOPS!!!
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Chad Johnson 5 minutes ago Report Abuse
Global warming has caused the ice caps to melt and freeze the Earth!!! Wow REALLY
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Sal Taxem 7 minutes ago Report Abuse
Federal Government Tax Revenues $2 TRILLION
Federal Government Expenditures $3 TRILLION

No more taxes...PLEASE!

Liquor Tax
Luxury Tax
Excise Taxes
Property Tax
Cigarette Tax
Medicare Tax
Inventory Tax
Car Rental Tax
Real Estate Tax
Well Permit Tax
Fuel Permit Tax
Inheritance Tax
Road Usage Tax
State Income Tax
Food License Tax
Vehicle Sales Tax

Want to read something unbelievable?

G00GLE search THE CASHa TEACHER then select the first link. Go and check out the "PENNY STOCKS" page first and then the "STOCKS" page to learn what the rich do not want us all to know??? It is our right to have some of this wealth!q1
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Jonathon 11 minutes ago Report Abuse
It's this dag gum global warming.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Aussteiger 13 minutes ago Report Abuse
Do not travel ,if you can not handle it!!!!!!!!!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Diana Pilbeam 13 minutes ago Report Abuse
Ayayay, Global warming is here! This is it! This very unprecedented cold never happened before and global warming is causing it! Seas are rising 200 feet as we speak and coastal cities are being flooded. Cap and tax now or it will be too late to steal your money! These jokers and thieving clowns are very funny. If you believe these crooks, then you really do not have a life and you are a zombie of these brainwashing fools.. Greta, I just got a $949.95 Dell laptop (17 inch) for $137.32 and if you think that's an awesome deal, my neighbor just got a 42 inch HDTV for $76.25 that's being delivered tomorrow to his house. It feels great not to pay high retail like the rest of the people. I am even selling some of the stuff at retail to my co-workers making 10 times my money back. Check out the site we found, go to GoGetBids.com
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Aussteiger 13 minutes ago Report Abuse
Do not ravel if you can not handle it!