12 men arrested in suspected UK terrorism plot

By PAISLEY DODDS, Associated Press – 1 min ago
LONDON – In the biggest anti-terrorist sweep in Britain in nearly two years, police on Monday arrested a dozen men accused of plotting a large-scale terror attack on targets inside the United Kingdom.
The suspects, who ranged in age from 17 to 28, had been under surveillance for weeks and were believed to have links to Pakistan and Bangladesh, security officials said.
The arrests come amid growing concerns in Europe over terrorism following a suicide bombing in Sweden and reported threats of a terror attack on a European city modeled on the deadly shooting spree in Mumbai, India.
Police swooped in before dawn Monday in coordinated raids on houses in four cities — London, the Welsh city of Cardiff and the English cities of Birmingham and Stoke-on-Trent. The officers were unarmed, suggesting any planned attack was not imminent.
The raid, a joint operation by Britain's domestic spy agency MI5 and police, was the largest since April 2009, when 12 men were detained over an alleged al-Qaida bomb plot in the northern city of Manchester.
Counterterrorism officials declined to give more details of the latest alleged plot, saying only that the men had been under surveillance for several weeks. No details were given as to whether explosives or arms were found, and searches were under way in the homes where the arrests took place.
"The operation is in its early stages so we are unable to go into detail at this time," said John Yates, Britain's senior counterterrorism police officer.
Still, he said Monday's raids, involving a dozen suspects across the U.K., indicated they were planning something big.
"This is a large scale, pre-planned and intelligence-led operation involving several forces," Yates said.
Police have up to 28 days to question the suspects before they must be charged or released.
The men are thought to be British nationals with links to Bangladesh and Pakistan, according to a counterterrorism official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the media. Britain is home to large Pakistani and Bangladeshi communities.
The arrests were not believed to be part of any planned holiday season attack, said a British security official who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of his work.
Iraqi officials claimed last week that captured insurgents believed the Dec. 11 bombing in Stockholm was part of a series of attacks planned for the Christmas season.
Those claims were rejected by both British and German officials, who insisted there are no specific threats to their countries over the holiday period.
In October, the U.S. State Department advised American citizens living or traveling in Europe to be wary amid reports that terrorists were planning a Mumbai-style attack on a European city.
Some of the details of a Mumbai-style plot directed at cities in Britain, France or Germany came from Ahmed Siddiqui, a German citizen of Afghan descent who was captured by U.S. troops in Afghanistan in July. More than 170 people were killed in the 2008 attack in the Indian city of Mumbai.
A government official downplayed reports that the latest raids were part of larger terror concerns across Europe.
"Although serious, we believe this raid may have been a one-off and not necessarily related to larger European terror plot concerns," said the official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the media.
Another government official said other plots being monitored within Britain had threads that linked back to the Europe-wide plot reported in October, but that there were no credible reports of a specific Christmas terror plot.
In the U.S., White House press secretary Robert Gibbs told reporters he did not know of any American connection to Monday's arrests.
Europe has been the target of numerous terror plots by Islamist militants. The deadliest was the 2004 Madrid train bombings, when shrapnel-filled bombs exploded, killing 191 people and wounding about 1,800. A year later, suicide bombers killed 52 rush-hour commuters in London aboard three subway trains and a bus.
In 2006, U.S. and British intelligence officials thwarted one of the largest plots yet, a plan to explode nearly a dozen trans-Atlantic airliners.
___
Associated Press writer David Stringer contributed to this report from London.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0ELM 1 minute ago Report Abuse
Fact remains- only a backwards medieval cult like ISLAM would be able to have a constant, fresh supply of people willing to blow themselves up and kill other innocent people on an almost daily basis...And these are average, every day Muslims that are willing to go do this- NOT seasoned terrorists! They are spreading to every part of the globe, not learning the culture, and having babies...Their plan is death of sanity through their@#$%roach reproductive cycles... SAVE Europe and America by expelling them- before it is too late!
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Joe S 2 minutes ago Report Abuse
Shocking..really shocking. And now word from the Moderate Muslims....ahem...now word from the Moderate Muslims.....ahem....er....any Moderate Muslims?
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Nasir-Ullah 3 minutes ago Report Abuse
For people like Canavar here! Tourists and diplomats: you always say such nice things about Muslims and their countries. What you don’t realize is the fact that the locals could tell you were tourist/foreigner - they were after your dollars OR using you as a ticket to USA (visa sponsorship) or to decadent white women through you. Plus you went only in the security safe zones. If you want to know the truth about Islam or Muslims then the next time first learn their local language mingle with them or even better yet visit their country without letting them know that you understand their language - you'll be surprised what they say in their language about you in front of your faces. Then talk to the minorities there - then come back and tell me how friendly they are or how they are just people like us raising families, chasing money and tail? Here is an example of a Muslim country for you. 
From Pakistan: they are the true epitome of a 2 face enemy disguised as a friendly beggar? I’ve lived there on contract with state department (Embassy). The same hospitable shopkeepers that offer you drinks in their shops (they know Americans have got the money) will be carrying “DEATH TO AMERICA” play cards in a rally next day (newspaper photo) and then the next time you go to the shop they ask you to sponsor them for their visa to USA or help them get a job at the US Embassy or bring more diplomatic customers to their shop or if they can come visit the embassy with you as your guest so they can meet white decadent women (or at least see them almost naked at the pool) etc. etc.. They are true beggars who curse you behind your back! This translates well into their dealings with international community esp. USA l e.g. they have some of the largest coal and gold mines and army and yet they are always begging for more foreign aid to feed their army and corrupt politicians – if they spend it on their people then who will believe their begging!
The nature of true Muslim sentiments can only be found out by people of LOCAL PHYSICAL APPEARANCE who know the LOCAL LANGUAGE and can MINGLE IN ALL SECURITY ZONES of that particular Muslim country. So all white journalists, diplomats, experts, professors and tourists who base their findings on their mingling with the elites (or their servants/acquaintances seeking visa sponsorships to western countries) of Muslim countries in security safe zones - sorry your sources are not credible. For all who will reply with the same old “but not all Muslims are the same”. I say true but 97% are - so might as well stop using seat belts too because they also don’t save lives 100% of the time either. The truth CAN EASILY be found out by talking to former Muslims, reformed Muslims, minorities and (true) asylum seekers from Muslim countries. Ask yourselves in the name of Political Correctness how long can we cowardly avoid accepting the “uncomfortable truth”?
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Diana Pilbeam 3 minutes ago Report Abuse
What kind of f up religion that tell you to blow yourself up, kill a bunch of innocent people, so that you can go to heaven and have sex with alot of women. Doesn't any of these terrorists ever stop and ask themselves..."wow there is something really f up about what I'm believing in".. Ross, I just got a $949.95 Dell laptop (17 inch) for $137.32 and if you think that's an awesome deal, my neighbor just got a 42 inch HDTV for $76.25 that's being delivered tomorrow to his house. It feels great not to pay high retail like the rest of the people. I am even selling some of the stuff at retail to my co-workers making 10 times my money back. Check out the site we found, go to GoGetBids.com
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0OPINIONATED 3 minutes ago Report Abuse
the officers were unarmed ??? do what?
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Private 5 minutes ago Report Abuse
Shoot em I say. No not them... them!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Nasir-Ullah 7 minutes ago Report Abuse
Muslims are not demented because of 5 times a day raising of their hand washed rears to their fake god allah - its because 97% of them are products of cousin marraiges! Baseball is the favorite pass time of Americans but the favorite pass time of muslims is homosexuality and beastiality. Actually PETA is perplexed about how to draft a document to be presented to UN urging muslim countries to do more to stop spreading STDs to animals in the muslim world!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Happy 7 minutes ago Report Abuse
Britain's now full of west-hating young arab muslims, openly defiant and enjoying the favored status that the behavior achieves for them in a country paralized by political correctness. Read about a pub in London, forced to install big exhausts in the kitchen because the smell of bacon disrupted the muslims gathering nearby. And they duly did it!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Canavar 9 minutes ago Report Abuse
I have lived Turkey and I know these anti-Muslim hate posts are just wrong. Why don't you get informed before you puke your vomit.
I posted a much more detailed note about the Turkish people and Turkey. There is nothing objectionable in it at all it's just worthwhile information and Yahoo has rejected it ten times. Why?
Reply
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Angry 10 minutes ago Report Abuse
Ok somebody tell me these people are not of the the islam faith?