Kidnapped Mexican politician freed after 7 months

By Cyntia Barrera Diaz – Mon Dec 20, 4:43 pm ET
MEXICO CITY, Dec 20 – Diego Fernandez de Cevallos, a prominent former Mexican presidential candidate, has been released seven months after being kidnapped by an unknown group.
Fernandez, a member of President Felipe Calderon's National Action Party, spoke to waiting media in front of his house in Mexico City on Monday.
"I am fine, thank God," said the former PAN senator, sporting a beard that turned completely white during his captivity. "I am strong and my life will continue being the same."
Cigar-chomping Fernandez was abducted in central Mexico in May as he arrived at his ranch late at night. His car was found with some of his belongings inside and blood on a pair of scissors thrown on the ground nearby.
In the following months, his captors released photos to selected media of a blindfolded, bearded man who greatly resembled Fernandez in an apparent move to pressure the politician's family to pay for his release.
Authorities said there is no indication Fernandez' captors had links to drugs or previous abductions for ransom.
In an impromptu news conference in the driveway of one of his residences in Mexico City, Fernandez said he pardoned his captors but that the authorities should seek them out.
"As a man of faith, of course, I forgive them. As a citizen, I think the authorities have some urgent work to do," said Fernandez, wearing a gray track suit and with his previously gray and white, well-trimmed beard now completely white and unkempt.
Calderon congratulated Fernandez on his release, while prosecutors said they would resume an investigation halted, at the family's request, days after the kidnapping.
Fernandez, known for his outspoken personality, is often called "Jefe Diego" (Boss Diego). He was a key figure in strengthening the PAN in the run-up to it winning the presidency in 2000 and ending seven decades of one-party rule by the Institutional Revolutionary Party.
In recent weeks, local media had reported conflicting reports in Fernandez' health and whereabouts, which intensified speculation about his condition. When he appeared publicly on Monday afternoon he gave no details of his capture, treatment or when he had been freed.
Kidnapping of executives, public officials and ordinary citizens for ransom is rife in Mexico, often ending in the deaths of victims.
Fernandez has close ties to key government figures such as Attorney General Arturo Chavez but does not hold any public office.
(Reporting by Cyntia Barrera Diaz; Editing by Vicki Allen and Philip Barbara)


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Stavo 6 minutes ago Report Abuse
Looks like they kept him loaded on some of that rotten rag weed they call dope, down there in old Mexico. lol He left a stereo typed rightwinger and came back a stoner.....cool!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Tipiklju 26 minutes ago Report Abuse
wow - he was held captive for 7 months? imagine if a jew / izrealhellie was captured for 7 mts - - we would have 24/7 coverage of it.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Yes 37 minutes ago Report Abuse
The vast majority of comments are from idiots who cannot stop commenting on how 'Santa-like' or 'Bin-Laden' like he looks. How about offering commentary on the actual problematic kidnappings in Mexico. Seriously, many here don't see the forest for the trees or the trees for the forest, but the shiny mirror like surface of a candy bar wrapper someone dropped there--"Ooooh, shiny!" Dolts.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0GermaicanSpice 38 minutes ago Report Abuse
I'm glad to see a happy ending! Noone deserves this kind of nightmare.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1 51 minutes ago Report Abuse
he needs to go to kentucky and run the noahs park theme park
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Tedds 55 minutes ago Report Abuse
No mention of any ransom being paid. Mexico does have a lot of work to do, he is right.
The last time that I can remember a prominent person in the USA being kidnapped for
ransom was perhaps the 70s and that was a fake. Sinatra's son just needed a few extra coins.
Paty Hearst, started out perhaps as a kidnapping, or not, in the 60s. There were during the
30s and 40s a lot of kidnappings for ransom. So, we might be doing something right. Except
of course for perverts not looking for ransom, but children. There does always seem to be a lot
of work to do anywhere.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2D. 1 hour ago Report Abuse
They freed Santa just in time!
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Yoni Beever 1 hour ago Report Abuse
What a FUBAR country!
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3 1 hour ago Report Abuse
i feel much better now with the luner eclipse and all
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.9Robert Duke
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment