2 US pilots freed on bail in Dominican Republic

By EZEQUIEL ABIU LOPEZ, Associated Press – 1 hr 51 mins ago
SANTO DOMINGO, Dominican Republic – Two U.S. cargo pilots whose supporters say they were inadvertently caught up in an apparent drug smuggling operation were freed from a Dominican jail Monday pending further investigation.
Kevin Kuranz, 31, of Sheboygan, Wis., and Christopher Schmidt, 28, of Maryville, Tenn., were visibly relieved by a three-judge panel's decision to grant them each $12,160 bail on the condition that they promptly return to the Caribbean country if authorities require their presence. No future hearings were immediately scheduled.
"I feel liberated," Schmidt said after the hearing, adding that he planned to return to Tennessee immediately to celebrate Christmas. His parents flew to the Dominican Republic to attend the hearing.
The pilots were detained Dec. 2 in Santo Domingo after agents from the Dominican anti-narcotics agency found about 321 pounds (146 kilograms) of cocaine and 4 pounds of heroin (2 kilograms) hidden in floor and ceiling panels of their cargo plane.
Three members of the Dominican military also arrested remain in custody and three others have been released on bail. An additional 12 military personnel were let go after authorities determined they were not involved.
No charges have been filed, but the Dominican legal system allows for preventive detention. Initially held in a cell with 14 other prisoners, the pilots were moved to a lower-security jail with more space.
Prosecutor Carmen Diaz Amezquita did not give details of where the case stands. A lawyer for the pilots, Miguel Valerio, said there was no evidence linking the men to the drugs found in their plane.
Kuranz and Schmidt were temporarily based in Puerto Rico, flying short cargo hops between the U.S. island and the Dominican Republic. After landing in the Dominican Republic, they left their plane for several hours while ground crews loaded the cargo. Authorities found the drugs while the pilots were away from the aircraft, according to their employer, Air Cargo Carriers.
On Monday, a frustrated James Germek, chief of the Milwaukee-based company, said: "We're not approving more contract services in the Dominican Republic, never."
Air Cargo Carriers appealed to the Dominican ambassador in Washington as well as authorities in the Dominican Republic to release the two men, at least on bail.
Rich Toner, a friend of Schmidt's, said numerous people were involved to secure the two pilots' release.
"The deciding factor here was not money or lawyers, it was family, friends, and a ridiculous amount of praying," Toner said in an e-mail.
___
Associated Press writer David McFadden contributed to this story from Kingston, Jamaica.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Larry 1 hour ago Report Abuse
who in the hell is eyes wide open?? more like eyes glued shut. semper fi usmc retired.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Roger Sat Dec 18, 2010 05:10 am PST Report Abuse
Wouldn't the FBl get involved in this US citizens case and pull records of their bank accounts? Follow the money, people, follow the money.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Rick Fri Dec 17, 2010 07:59 pm PST Report Abuse
These dominicans are all over the place here in USA from Miami to Maine I have seen them all over. How in the hell are these opportunistic trash parasite dominicans getting into the USA? All dominicans need to be depored from the USA immediately and their anchor babies too and their papers should be looked at more carefully as to how in the hell these dominicans have gained entry into USA. dominicans are sneaky no good scumb
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2P Fri Dec 17, 2010 10:18 am PST Report Abuse
every time when a white man caught trafficing drug in foreign countries they always claim it is a mistake
they use all kinds of excuses like not knowing the rules, not understand the language or mental retardation
get over it
they are the root of all drug trades
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Charles Fri Dec 17, 2010 01:17 am PST Report Abuse
Whoever was their TSA approved Ground Security Coordinator failed in his/her duties. 
Hope these pilots enjoy their mini-vacation!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1SeanK Thu Dec 16, 2010 09:02 pm PST Report Abuse
When I was there last yearI was told they are very tough on drugs in the Dominican Republic. I tried to see it was possible to get pot and they were almost scared that I asked. And this was a few times. I guess I thought because it was SO EASY to get it in Jamaica (and smoking it in front of the police) that it might be easy in the D.R.. It was not, sadly. So we had to rely on their horrible pseudo rums and vodkas.
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Joseph Thu Dec 16, 2010 08:57 pm PST Report Abuse
In Houston,if the police find drugs in your car or a car you are driving,the drugs belong to you.. It is up to you to explain to the judge that the drugs belong to the ghost of your dead great grandfather
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Eyes Wide Open Thu Dec 16, 2010 08:51 pm PST Report Abuse
"In 1926, Prescott S. Bush joined the banking conglomerate of W. A. Harriman as Vice-President under the bank's president, Bert Walker, his father-in-law. Harriman owned the Hamburg-America shipping line and SUPPLIED THE WEAPONS to equip the Brown-Shirts—Hitler’s private police force."
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Eyes Wide Open Thu Dec 16, 2010 08:45 pm PST Report Abuse
James 5:16 “confess your sins to each other”

If Bush is really a Christian, why doesn’t he confess what he did in the Skulls & Bones, occultic symbols of death and thievery? 

1 John 1:9: "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Timmy Thu Dec 16, 2010 08:32 pm PST Report Abuse
These guys didn't have a clue. The drugs were getting a free ride to the US. The off loaders are involved...