







– 

Mon Dec 20, 1:27 pm ET


HARARE (AFP) – Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe and Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai on Monday urged their supporters to shun violence ahead of the country's elections planned for next year.

"What we would want to get to our people is our voice and our command that there should be no violence, but that does not mean that everybody will listen to us," Mugabe said at a joint end-of-year news conference with Tsvangirai.

"Having found each other as Zimbabweans we had no option, but to work together. Today we have greater political stability than ever before. There is peace," said Mugabe.

Mugabe was last weekend endorsed by his ZANU-PF party as the candidate for the elections mooted for 2011.

Tsvangirai's Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) has also conceded that a presidential election could take place in 2011, but ruled out parliamentary polls until 2013.

"We come from different political parties and when we have differences we go for each other's throat at party level, but let it not be said because of that we are dysfunctional," Mugabe said.

In 2008, the two leaders entered into an uneasy power-sharing deal, following months of political turmoil over the outcome of a violence marred presidential run-off.

Tsvangarai has struggled to assert his authority in the unity government, with Mugabe making key appointments without consulting him.

"Yes, there are incidences of violence and we have witnessed it and we are committed as leaders to ensure that the next election is certainly not characterised by a culture of violence," said Tsvangirai.

"That demon must be ostracized, it is a demon that no-one wants," he added.

The two leaders could not be drawn into giving indications when the polls would be held, saying that a referendum for a new constitution would first have to be finalised.

Follow Yahoo! News on 

Twitter
, become a fan on 

Facebook






 

Post a Comment






0

users liked this comment

Please sign in to rate this comment up.

Please sign in to rate this comment down.

0

users disliked this comment



Cyrus


41 minutes ago

Report Abuse

Mugabe is a post colonial product, when westerners handed the guns and transfered the power to people like Mugabe or Ahmedinejad in iran or many other nations to save their interests. it was from direct to indirect control of nations. it was not giving those nations right to serve their own people





0

users liked this comment

Please sign in to rate this comment up.

Please sign in to rate this comment down.

0

users disliked this comment



charlie


5 hours ago

Report Abuse

Finally a breakthrough? If Mugabe is being sincere and honest with this, I will respect the change.


Post a Comment

Sign in
 to post a comment, or 

Sign up
 for a free account.




Sponsored Links




Ministry Classes Online
 Affordable, Online Classes in Ministry. Request Free School Info Today 

EarnMyDegree.com/Ministry


State University in 2 Yrs
 Get State University Degree with Financial Aid. Advance Your Career. 

DegreeGuide.com/State-University


Morgan State University
 Get your degree faster than you think. Financial aid options. Act now! 

www.UniversityHelp.com



Featured





The Year in Cartoons
A collection of some of the best political cartoons from 2010.

» More from Washington Post



Time's 'Person of Year'
Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg is Time's "Person of the Year."

» More from Time



The New Royals
Complete coverage of William and Kate's wedding.

» More on Facebook



TIME slideshow
Around the world via a day's worth of food.

» More from Time



Palin in 2012?
Nearly six in 10 say no, poll finds.

» More from ABC News



Education

Yahoo







Degrees Hiring Managers Want
Get the skinny on the degrees HR managers want. Go now!



Jobs That Are Hiring Now
Which jobs are hiring now ... and what do they pay? Find out!


Copyright © 2010 

Agence France Presse
. All rights reserved. The information contained in the AFP News report may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed without the prior written authority of Agence France Presse.
