Merger of Somali militants could mean more attacks

MALKHADIR M. MUHUMED, Associated Press – 1 hr 12 mins ago
NAIROBI, Kenya – Somalia's weak, U.N.-backed government could face an increase in attacks from Islamist insurgents after the two largest groups dropped their running feud and merged, analysts and fighters said Monday.
The announcement on Sunday of a merger between al-Shabab and Hizbul Islam means the two won't waste resources fighting one another, and will instead concentrate on fighting the Mogadishu-based government and the African Union troops who protect it, said Sheik Mohamed Osman Arus, Hizbul Islam's head of operations.
"The two groups have already shared ammunition, field clinics and fought together," Arus said. "But having a united leadership will mean the end of the puppet government and the African dogs," a term militants use for the 8,000 African Union troops in Mogadishu.
Since its establishment in 2007, al-Shabab has sought to defeat any Islamist rival. The group — Somalia's most dangerous — increased attacks on Hizbul Islam in recent months and overtook several towns Hizbul Islam once controlled, military momentum that hastened the merger.
Abdirahim Isse Adow, the director of the government-run Radio Mogadishu, saw the merger as an opportunity for the government.
"It will be easier for the government to fight one group instead of fighting two different parties," he said. "The public got fed up with al-Shabab's tactics, and now the government can present itself as the only option in the market of winning hearts and minds."
Al-Shabab imposes a harsh and conservative reading of Islam that bans movies and TV. Punishments include the chopping off of hands of thieves and death by stoning of adulterers. Several hundred foreign fighters — some of them veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts — populate its ranks.
Hizbul Islam has previously condemned al-Shabab's use of suicide bombers and summary executions. Its founder, Sheik Hassan Dahir Aweys, also criticized al-Shabab's public pledge of allegiance to Osama bin Laden. Hizbul Islam is widely seen as having a more nationalist agenda than al-Shabab, which has been heavily influenced by Wahhabi Islam ideology.
Arus, the Hizbul Islam commander, said his group united with al-Shabab under its own terms because continued fighting would only degrade both organizations, giving "more power to the enemy." He said that 22 Hizbul Islam leaders met in Mogadishu on Friday and Saturday and decided on joining al-Shabab.
"We said to ourselves fighting al-Shabab will only lead to the Islamists' downfall, as those apostates (the government and its backers) will take advantage of our weakness," Arus said. "So we decided to unite with al-Shabab and strengthen the Mujahedeen. We will advise those hardline elements in it from within."
Omar Abdirahman Mohamed, a political commentator on Mogadishu radio stations, said the merger wasn't equal, but that al-Shabab "gobbled up" Hizbul Islam.
"The merger is a not a sea change in Somali politics," he said. "I don't think that their merger will affect the government significantly because they were already government enemies. If it brings something it is that it will only make reconciliation efforts more difficult because the anti-peace al-Shabab has taken over the opposition."
Rashid Abdi, a Somali analyst with the International Crisis Group, downplayed the alliance, calling it "tactical."
"I don't think it can have a serious military effect on the government because Hizbul Islam has been weakened by al-Shabab and desertions," he said. "I'm skeptical about its life span."


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Kelly 5 minutes ago Report Abuse
Coming to a town near you in the USA!! Good for you liberal anti gunners. Don't run to the white man in the south when you are being raped and tortured by these subhumans. You have been warned!
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Neisha 7 minutes ago Report Abuse
They are now more of a threat than afghan/paki...going to need more troops
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Bobd 14 minutes ago Report Abuse
Another front to fight the war on terrorist scum. 

Its ironic. If the extremists are victorious in conquering the Somali government, it will open another front for the US war against terrorism. 

Their victory will be their demise.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0179 IQ 14 minutes ago Report Abuse
Help ! Help ! Send in more Bananas and extra Pork ! ! ! ! Keep the Aids infested Monkeys at bay ! ! ! !
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0J M 20 minutes ago Report Abuse
blacks,mexicans muslems all the same,merry christmas,everyone.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0J M 21 minutes ago Report Abuse
blacks,mexicans spells muslems.merry christmas.
Reply
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0AISHA 4 hours ago Report Abuse
yes there should be more attacks,,,,,
open season on them muzzie devils,,,,
maby even a bounty,,,
Reply
 
8Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Owen 7 hours ago Report Abuse
Islam looking at taking over another country by force of arms. "Religion of peace and if you say otherwise I will kill you!" 

Islam is at war with the world. It is time for the world to wake up and see that this is not a bunch of little wars and terror attacks. It is all part of one big war we do not even want to admit is happening. Wake up
Reply
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ms.Abou-Ahorj 8 hours ago Report Abuse
this is crazy, the whole east Africa! where ever Islam is and Arabs are there is hate! This must stop!! stop following Arabs.. As Africans we must stop this madness and get our stuff together!
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0No 8 hours ago Report Abuse
Remember their motto"an enemy of an enemy is a friend until we kill our shared enemy,then my new friend is dead!