Afghan parliament to convene Jan. 20

By PATRICK QUINN, Associated Press – Mon Dec 20, 8:22 am ET
KABUL, Afghanistan – Afghanistan's parliament will convene on Jan. 20, more than four months after the fraud-tainted elections, the president's spokesman said Monday.
Waheed Omar said the 249-seat parliament will be inaugurated after the winter break. The elections were held on Sept. 18 and the results ratified by the Independent Election Commission on Nov. 24.
The ballot was plagued by irregularities and voter intimidation. Election officials discarded 1.3 million ballots — nearly a quarter of the total — for fraud and disqualified 19 winning candidates for cheating. The attorney general's office also launched a separate investigation into allegations of ballot manipulation.
Afghan authorities also said the final death toll from Sunday's suicide bomb attacks against security forces in the capital and the northern city of Kunduz was 14.
The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attacks, in which militants struck at an army recruitment center in Kunduz and ambushed a bus carrying Afghan army personnel in Kabul.
The U.S.-led Coalition said the Afghan security forces were effective in stopping the attacks.
"The professionalism and skill the Afghan National Security Forces displayed while combating insurgent attacks yesterday was very inspiring," said German Brig. General Josef Blotz, the Coalition spokesman.
The brunt of the fighting in Kunduz was taken up by Afghan security forces, assisted by some NATO forces. AP video showed U.S. troops also returning fire in Kunduz.
Recruitment and training for the Afghan army and police is a key component of a plan to transition responsibility for security to local forces by the end of 2014, allowing U.S.-led forces to withdraw from the country.
In the past year, the Afghan National Army grew 42 percent — from 97,000 to 138,164. The size of the police force rose from about 95,000 to 120,504, or 27 percent. But the security forces are also seen as corrupt and many units suffer high rates of attrition.
Omar also lauded the training and professionalism of the Afghan security forces, which he said was evident in Kunduz, but said more effort had to be made by the international community to better equip troops and police.
"Time and effort was placed on training Afghan National Security Forces," Omar told reporters. "We will not agree that lots of time and effort was spent equipping" them.
Kunduz, a major agricultural and marketing center that controls one of the main highways into neighboring Tajikistan, virtually shut down, with shops, the bazaar and administrative offices closing as the gunbattle raged.
The city was the last major urban center held by the Taliban in 2001, and militants began stepping up attacks there after NATO began using supply routes through former Soviet states bordering northern Afghanistan as alternatives to routes through Pakistan, where NATO convoys have come under frequent attack.
Much of the fiercest fighting in Afghanistan has been concentrated in the Taliban's traditional southern strongholds. An internal review of President Barack Obama's year-old war strategy unveiled Thursday noted progress against the Taliban in the south, where the U.S. deployed an additional 30,000 American troops this year.
___
Associated Press writer Amir Shah contributed to this report


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ron E. 5 hours ago Report Abuse
You people are so wrapped up in the smokescreen. They are testing to see if they can install an active government that people will be forced to obey with no rights. Its working in the most violent area of the world. If you got military forcing a new government with its own agenda here its called martial law.
Replies (2)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Kelly 18 hours ago Report Abuse
the taliban obviously have people all over Afganistan. not necessarily in large numbers. you only need a few people to mount attacks when you are a terrorist and can attack anytime you want to. that does not suggest what this article is suggesting. there are taliban commanders in different regions of the country who conduct themselves indepent of the other groups. we have captured or killed over 600
taliban leaders and commanders in the past 2 years. to think they are not weakend is nonsense.
if they were strong as before all our operations would center on protecting the capital Kabul. for us
to invade and occupied large areas of the country that use to be taliban strongholds only shows we
are slowly winning the war. once we get the taliban out of an area the people will turn against them as 
the ruled only by fear and intimidation.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Youcanthandlethetruth 18 hours ago Report Abuse
The out-of-control CIA/other American intelligence agencies are the biggest threat to US security. If something happens to Julian Assange, a 2010 version of the Church Committee should be started to clean out those in these agencies who think the US is above the rule of law.

I fully support the good people in our agencies who value the Bill of Rights, but not those who think it is ok to illegally violate the privacy rights of American citizens. The bad should be investigated and flushed out.

Can't wait.
Replies (2)
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Sonya 19 hours ago Report Abuse
what this newspost fails to mention is that...all Afghanistan hates America to the core.....will continue standing against it like a wall...just as it did against USSR bringing its downfall....Its just the right time to get out of there....and stop the proxy war.
Replies (2)
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Fdgdzfghd 19 hours ago Report Abuse
Nobody actually knows if these guys were Taliban. Nobody knows anything anymore. It's all just bunko military press releases and propaganda. Even my friends who are Vets say this whole thing is about breeding terrorists. It's such a sham. But don't worry Haliburton is getting paid...
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0William S 19 hours ago Report Abuse
Come Mr taliban, tally me bannana!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Citra 19 hours ago Report Abuse
Why all you rightys and leftys are arguing amongst yourself without coming to an agreement on anything I cant understand! All it is doing is letting other countries and the enemy that the ENTIRE country is facing to find footholes around the policys that the U.S. has, because the leaders are afraid to anger one side or the other in this country that cannot agree on anything at the moment... Whether you like the current president or the past is does not matter. In my opinion the first made a decision that he himself is not sure was the right idea. Then there is Obama, who I think came to term with the right intentions, but is letting his fear of the opposing party get to him, so maybe he is, and was not ready to be the President of the United States. Anyway, a country united can only overcome a country divided like Afghanistan....
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Honk City 20 hours ago Report Abuse
Just like any war. The poor and disadvantage fight it while the rich kids party at Daytona beach...Happy holidays.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Hado 20 hours ago Report Abuse
Dont worry folks, if we couldnt defeat a rag tag guerilla army after 9 years and trillions of $$$ later, we can definitely do it in another 9 years with another few trillions of $$$. I mean its not like we are low on $$$'s or anything, right? Happy holidays!
Reply
 
11Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Mike 20 hours ago Report Abuse
"These Gentlemen are the moral equivalents of our Founding Fathers".
-Ronald Reagan introducing the mujahideen on to press White House lawn 1985

16 years later we attacked the moral equivalents of our founding fathers.