Canadian gas megaproject gets nod but future cloudy

By Jeffrey Jones and Scott Haggett – Thu Dec 16, 5:11 pm ET
CALGARY, Alberta (Reuters) – Canada's energy regulator said on Thursday it approved plans for a C$16.2 billion ($16.1 billion) Arctic gas pipeline, a project that faces growing economic pressure as natural gas prices languish.
The National Energy Board, following six years of deliberations, said the Mackenzie Gas Project is in the public interest provided that the major oil companies that are backing it meet more than 200 environmental and socioeconomic conditions.
"We examined the benefits the project can bring. We found that they are large and varied," the board said in its ruling. "We also looked at the negative impacts. We found that they can be minimized and are acceptable."
The project, first envisioned in the 1970s, is led by Imperial Oil Ltd. Its partners are Royal Dutch Shell, ConocoPhillips, Exxon Mobil Corp, and Aboriginal Pipeline Group.
The federal government still needs to sign off on the approval.
The NEB said the companies must provide an updated cost estimate and make a go-ahead decision by the end of 2013 and construction must start by the end of 2015.
The government of the Northwest Territories and many residents of northern Canada have been anxiously awaiting a decision on the massive development, which they say has the potential to create jobs and spinoff businesses, especially in regions where traditional livelihoods are vanishing.
Some environmental groups have opposed the Mackenzie project, arguing it would disturb pristine wilderness.
The Mackenzie pipeline would carry as much as 1.2 billion cubic feet of gas a day to the Alberta border from the Mackenzie Delta on the Beaufort Sea coast.
($1=$1.01 Canadian)
(Editing by Peter Galloway)


1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Onemensa 9 hours ago Report Abuse
Considering the political climate in the middle east and central America, as well as the enviornmental concerns associated with offshore drilling, Americans should buy every cubic foot of Canadian natural gas they can produce.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ty Sat Dec 18, 2010 07:21 am PST Report Abuse
There is a company out of Utah that sells the conversion kit to nat gas for our vehicles.The downside is it cost $7000 For the kit and the gas compressor.But at 3 dollars a gal. for gasoline compared to 93 cents a gal. the break evan point is 21 months at 1 tank a week.Good deal and you aviod the road tax and future increase in road tax on gas .We should all convert.Also fliing j truck stop is adding these stations nation wide to convert our diesal comm. fleet in 5 years time table.this is all true and factualy correct. Ty
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0THE WORKS JR. Fri Dec 17, 2010 10:47 am PST Report Abuse
jobs!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1RogerC Fri Dec 17, 2010 05:49 am PST Report Abuse
Alberta, their coffee shop pays $18 an hour I heard.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Watcher Fri Dec 17, 2010 12:21 am PST Report Abuse
Build an Alaska Gas Pipe line. Why give our dollars to Canadians?
Replies (1)
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Americans First Thu Dec 16, 2010 06:40 pm PST Report Abuse
I hope they do build it so I can work on the pipeline.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1LaLoba Wed Nov 17, 2010 01:42 am PST Report Abuse
Lets reduce our use of oil . period. Public transport local sourcing of food, etc......drill less.
Reply
 
7Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2DD Tue Nov 16, 2010 10:42 am PST Report Abuse
Let's join Canada in a gas Cartel and become energy independent.

Let's get out of the Middle East, Africa and South America.

The oil industry's insistence on maintaining reliance on foreign oil for our energy is completely detrimental to the interests of America.