Focus on deficits, Flaherty tells Canada provinces

By Jeffrey Jones – 1 hr 45 mins ago
KANANASKIS, Alberta (Reuters) – Canadian Finance Minister Jim Flaherty said on Monday he expected almost all of the country's provinces to eliminate their budget deficits by 2015, the same target the federal government has set for itself.
The one exception is Ontario, the most populous province, which took the biggest financial hit in the recession, Flaherty said.
He and provincial finance ministers met in the Rocky Mountain resort of Kananaskis, Alberta, on Monday to discuss deficits, the economic outlook and pension reform, an area of shared responsibility.
On pensions, Flaherty cautioned against making the country's public pension plan more expensive for employers at a time of economic uncertainty.
Most of the provinces expect to run budget deficits in the 2010-11 fiscal year.
"We did agree that we would all try to move to balanced budgets in the medium term," Flaherty told reporters following the meeting. "I think virtually all of the governments would be balanced by 2015, some earlier as a matter of fact."
Ontario, which has a shortfall estimated at C$18.7 billion ($18.3 billion) this year, will likely be the laggard. But Dwight Duncan, the province's finance minister, said Ontario beat its deficit-reduction targets in the first year of a seven-year reduction plan.
The Ontario government has said officially it plans to balance its books by 2017-18.
Flaherty said that now is not the time to heap more costs on employers by expanding the public pension plan, a move urged by Ontario, five other provinces as well as by labor groups.
At the meeting, the ministers agreed to keep studying the controversial proposals to expand the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) and to report back at their next meeting in June.
But Flaherty said he was wary of the impact on job creation.
"There are encouraging signs of improvement across a range of indicators, particularly on the domestic front," he said. "Ministers agreed, however, that the situation remains fragile, with concern over mounting public debt in many countries and its implications for long-term growth."
Alberta Finance Minister Ted Morton, who does not support increasing CPP payments, said Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney told the meeting that the country's debt and deficit situation was better than those in the United States and the European Union, but that "the question is trend".
"I'm not going to be a scaremonger, or a fear-monger, but when both the governor and the finance minister say this is an important issue, everybody should listen," he said.
The group agreed on a framework to establish a new pooled retirement plan, separate from the public pension plan, aimed at the self-employed and small-business employees. It would be managed by insurance companies.
Flaherty said stimulus measures taken by his government helped the provinces weather the economic crisis and now governments at both levels need to cut the deficits that fueled the programs.
Canada's 2009-10 deficit totaled C$55.6 billion, or 3.6 percent of gross domestic product. Ottawa aims to shrink that to C$45.4 billion in 2010-11 and return to surplus in 2015-16.
($1=$1.01 Canadian)
(Additional reporting by Louise Egan in Ottawa; editing by Peter Galloway)


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0☠ BOSSK ☠من الجن⏄ ... Tue Dec 14, 2010 02:47 pm PST Report Abuse
Tooneys & Looneys
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Keystone Mon Dec 13, 2010 01:48 pm PST Report Abuse
Abolish Fanny Mae and Freddy Mac.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Crystal Sun Dec 12, 2010 09:38 pm PST Report Abuse
Actually Marvin the USA has the most millionaires and billionaires in the entire world. I don't know if they flocked here or not though.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0P Sun Dec 12, 2010 08:44 pm PST Report Abuse
sure it is good for any country that is not booming
it hurt those who is fighting inflation
what a trajedy for the world
and most people who is not wealthy
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Marvin Sun Dec 12, 2010 09:39 am PST Report Abuse
As, long as we let the Military Industrial Complex run the country get used to being on a lower wrung that most of the other developed nations of the world. 2010's budget for the defense dept including items directly tied to but not in the budget 1.23 Trillion Dollars. More than all our allies spend combined. Much of this money is tied to the entitlements section of the budget and thereby escapes scrutiny and is unfairly lumped in with other social programs. That is around 600 billion that gets overlooked. Wonder why the rest of the world's developed countries can afford healthcare ? Well,heres one reason the other of course is their tax rates aren't quite so generous to the Wealthy, yet you don't see millionaires flocking to the US.
Reply
 
5Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Johnny B Mon Dec 06, 2010 03:40 am PST Report Abuse
The lesson here is that the goverments that did not have massive bailouts are now pulling out of this mess. Another lesson that will fall on the deaf ears of Obama.
Replies (1)
 
8Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2CB Sat Dec 04, 2010 12:14 am PST Report Abuse
Eventually Americans will began living with third world life quality standards while Canadians, Europeans, Australians and other White European powers surpass us and remain first world. I suspect that's what our political leaders, both Democrat and Republican, want for us for different reasons, but with the same result.
Replies (2)
 
9Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3IBARK Fri Dec 03, 2010 03:04 pm PST Report Abuse
With the current employment and health care system in the U.S., I am like many others are thinking of moving to Canada. Seriously!
Replies (2)
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Asksagewarrior Fri Dec 03, 2010 11:07 am PST Report Abuse
Finance Minister Jim Flaherty is not the only one worried...Out of work Americans are freaked out as well!
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.12Allen
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment