PM: WikiLeaks has not broken Australian law

By ROHAN SULLIVAN, Associated Press – Thu Dec 16, 11:37 pm ET
SYDNEY – Police in Australia have concluded that WikiLeaks and its Australian-born founder Julian Assange have not broken any laws in his home country by publishing classified U.S. documents, the government said Friday.
The finding has no direct bearing on investigations in the United States into the original leaking of the thousands of classified diplomatic documents to Assange's organization, or the sexual assault allegations for which he is wanted in Sweden.
But it will come as good news to Assange, who has complained of persecution by the Australian government over the publication of the documents, which have outraged Washington and been condemned by the United States and its allies.
Assange has not said he wants to return to Australia, though his mother and son both live in the country.
The government said last month it had ordered Australian Federal Police to determine whether WikiLeaks had broke any Australian laws by publishing the U.S. cables. Reports of documents obtained by WikiLeaks have included classified reports from the U.S. Embassy in Canberra to the State Department.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard on Friday said the police had now reported back to the government.
"The advice is that there has been no breaches of Australian law," Gillard told reporters.
Attorney-General Robert McClelland gave a little more information, saying in a statement that, on the current information available, police had not identified any criminal offenses within Australia's jurisdiction so no formal investigation had been launched.
Gillard again condemned WikiLeaks for publishing the documents, saying it was "grossly irresponsible." The government has said publication of the internal documents could harm relations between governments.
She said whoever leaked the documents to WikiLeaks had clearly broken U.S. laws. She said that theft was appropriately being investigated by U.S. authorities. Australian officials have said they are assisting U.S. authorities in that investigation.
Assange was released on bail Thursday from a London jail, where he was being held in connection to the Swedish sexual molestation allegations. Assange has denied any wrongdoing, but has said that he is concerned that if he goes to Sweden he may eventually be sent to the United States on charges related to the leaks.
No such charges have been laid, but U.S. officials are investigating whether Assange could be charged in U.S. court under the Espionage Act or face other crimes — such as theft of government property or receipt of stolen government property.
The U.S. government suspects WikiLeaks received the documents from an Army private, Bradley Manning, who is in the brig on charges of leaking other classified documents to the organization.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Judi Sat Dec 18, 2010 10:25 am PST Report Abuse
I suppose they do not have receiving stolen property laws???
J.A,,is for JACK @#$%!
Replies (1)
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ray-Man Sat Dec 18, 2010 09:57 am PST Report Abuse
By charging a foreign citizen with Treason in America, we will also open a floodgate of similar charges filed in other countries against American citizens. Does the concept of 'Tit for Tat' come to anyone's mind. American servicemen, politicians or just ordinary American citizens will then become 'fair game'. Espionage Yes, treason No.
Beware of what you ask for.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Linda Sat Dec 18, 2010 07:06 am PST Report Abuse
When death results they are as responcible as it they pulled the triger.Take every dime they will ever make.......It still is not enough to pay fore the lives lost......keep searching sh#$ always floots to the top.
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Do You Hear What I Hear? Fri Dec 17, 2010 11:06 pm PST Report Abuse
Courageous Julian Assange certainly has many complaints, and doesn't see it to be a priority to be with his son in Australia, or elsewhere. Perhaps he has more important things to do?
Replies (1)
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1LawrenceG Fri Dec 17, 2010 12:39 pm PST Report Abuse
Will wikileaks be open? Will we see their internal documents? Will we see where their executives travel?

Or, do they just put other people in danger?

Like the soldier that will rot decades in jail while Poor, Poor Julian spends a few days in jail.

Nah, Julian is now the toast of celebrities everywhere, while others suffer and die.

Privacy is dead in the Digital age. Thanks Julian.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Li Fri Dec 17, 2010 12:14 pm PST Report Abuse
lol... I guess they have to leak Australian secret documents to be guilty in Australia
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Cramdam13 Fri Dec 17, 2010 12:02 pm PST Report Abuse
Just how many people has Wikileaks endangered ? Can we at least deal in facts. Do you even have any examples. Any idea you know what you're talking about ?
But, I do agree that many have been embarrassed. Hopefully, more to come.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Echo Fri Dec 17, 2010 11:32 am PST Report Abuse
I live in a cardboard box, it's full of secrets.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.9Nov2012
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.8Jp Fri Dec 17, 2010 10:20 am PST Report Abuse
So, I guess we should hack Australia's systems & spill there confidential information all over the world. 
We have the expectation of privacy in our lives, confidentiality in our business dealings, & no person or entity has the right to publicize that information. Assange is a rat, all you people praising him should tell him your darkest secret's & see how you like what he sreads.
Replies (3)