WikiLeaks did not commit offence in Australia: police

– Thu Dec 16, 10:23 pm ET
SYDNEY (Reuters) – Australian police said on Friday that WikiLeaks did not commit any criminal offence in the country by releasing secret U.S. diplomatic cables which discussed sensitive government policies.
"The AFP (Australian Federal Police) has completed its evaluation of the material available and has not established the existence of any criminal offences where Australia would have jurisdiction," the AFP said in a statement.
The Australian government ordered police to investigate whether WikiLeaks, founded by Australian Julian Assange, had committed a criminal offence in Australia.
The request followed comments by Prime Minister Julia Gillard that the "foundation stone" of the release of secret U.S. cables by WikiLeaks was "an illegal act that certainly breached the laws of the United States of America."
Gillard has been criticized by pro-WikiLeak supporters and some members of her Labor government for possibly prejudicing Assange in any future criminal case.
WikiLeaks has provoked fury in Washington with its publications of secret U.S. cables and vows to make public the 250,000 embassy documents it had obtained. The cables include details of overseas installations that Washington regards as vital to its security.
Assange was released on bail in Britain on Thursday while he awaits charges of sexual assault in Sweden.
Assange and his lawyers have voiced fears that U.S. prosecutors might be preparing to indict him for espionage over WikiLeaks' publication of the documents.
The U.S. cables on Australia released by WikiLeaks have revealed intelligence agency briefings on terrorism in Southeast Asia and South Asia, as well as more personal assessments of government members, including former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, who was described as a "control freak" focused on the media.
"The government referred the matter to the AFP as it was prudent to examine whether any Australian laws have been broken," Attorney-General Robert McClelland said.
"As has previously been stated, given the documents published to date are classified by the United States, the primary jurisdiction for any investigation into the matter remains the United States," he said.
"The government remains extremely concerned about the unauthorized and irresponsible distribution of classified material."
The AFP said it would investigate any further cable releases if criminal charges were suspected.
(Reporting by Michael Perry; Editing by Ed Davies)


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Robertd Fri Dec 17, 2010 10:10 am PST Report Abuse
leaking the documents is perfectly legal in any nation.... not a good idea to let some of the super sensitive things out like the targets or places terrorists should hit. i dont support those details in the leaks. but i do support the outing of the character of the people that think they are gods gift to politics all while gossiping and writing nonsense about other nations and allies. when the leaders of the free world have as much common sense as a 5th grader thats where you need to start being scared! the important lesson here is... do not say stuff you will regret.... and if you still find yourself foolish enough to say it do not write it down.....and well if your stupid enough to say it, then write it down, then save it to a database..... you guessed it your just about dumb enough to be a united states politician!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.11776 - 2008 RIP Thu Dec 16, 2010 10:33 pm PST Report Abuse
Don't worry australia, the next time you need assistance or support, whatever it is sure isn't violating US law.