Australia calls off search for shipwreck survivors

by Madeleine Coorey – Sat Dec 18, 3:57 am ET
SYDNEY (AFP) – Australia said it had called off the main search for survivors from a shipwreck on Christmas Island in which dozens of asylum seekers died, as tensions rose on the crowded immigration outpost.
Rescuers had continued the air and sea search until late on Friday, authorities said, but had decided on medical advice "that there is no longer any reasonable prospect that anyone in the sea could still be alive."
"The Australian Federal Police will continue to conduct shoreline searches, including the use of police divers," Customs said in a statement.
Emotions have been high on the Indian Ocean island since the wooden fishing boat crowded with families broke up after slamming against limestone rocks in heavy seas on Wednesday, as horrified residents looked on unable to help.
So far, 30 people have been confirmed dead and 42 rescued but refugee advocates say the vessel was likely carrying more than 90 people at it neared Christmas Island, which lies 2,600 kilometres (1,600 miles) from the mainland.
Asylum seekers on the island, which houses the country's main immigration detention centre, have staged two protests since the tragedy, but officials have said that these have been peaceful and the centre remains calm.
Demonstrators at the protests, which were both on Friday and each involved about 70 people, expressed their frustrations at conditions inside the camp and the shipwreck deaths, an official said.
"Emotions are raw in our detention facilities on Christmas Island, it's been a very difficult time for all involved," Immigration Minister Chris Bowen told reporters in Sydney.
"As I understand it, there was also an air-conditioning failure yesterday caused by an island-wide power outage and that would understandably make people a little more distressed.
"But as I stressed, no protest achieves its desired outcome. If a process is about trying to achieve a different outcome of a processing of visa applications, that is not something we respond to in any way at all."
Refugee campaigner Jamal Daoud said it was nonsense to suggest the protests were triggered by the breakdown in the air-conditioning on the remote tropical island, adding that inmates had been deeply affected by Wednesday's tragedy.
Bowen acknowledged Christmas Island was under stress because of an influx of boatpeople this year, with thousands arriving in the past 12 months, and said that people would be moved to expanded accommodation as soon as possible.
The facility is currently holding close to 300 people more than it was designed to accommodate.
He said the centre would hold memorial services for the victims of the shipwreck, who were mostly Iraqi, Iranian and Kurdish, on Sunday and Monday.
The wider Christmas Island community would hold its own service in the near future.
Customs confirmed Saturday that the dead were men and women of all ages, including one male infant and three female infants.
Six survivors were being treated at Royal Perth Hospital while the remainder of the 42 rescued were being accommodated on Christmas Island.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Ilie 11 hours ago Report Abuse
are they muslims?let them crok
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Jimmy O 12 hours ago Report Abuse
if they want to protest, then they should go back home where most likely they would be killed for protesting. These people are taking advantage of the free world nations such as Australia, United States, and Great Britain. And the sad part of the entire thing, is that we are letting them.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Frank 19 hours ago Report Abuse
They are human beings! What attempt was made to save them? I see Aussies standing there for an hour. Why was not a boat from the port sent to help them be towed to safety? I blame the Aussies and their aperthy to help refugees. Shame on you! You were all from somewhere else. Now you will have to take the guilt to your grave and have sleepless nights especially when another storm hits.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Allan Sat Dec 18, 2010 01:59 am PST Report Abuse
bad luck they died but that's the chance they take.Stand firm Australia and don't let these people into your country.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Name Fri Dec 17, 2010 10:01 pm PST Report Abuse
f@#% them it not there country
Replies (1)
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Sweetpupz Fri Dec 17, 2010 09:13 pm PST Report Abuse
Raul ,no, we are no longer what YOU thought we were!You and your ilk took advantage of us and now none of your ilk is welcome!Sorry they died but no more WHITE GUILT!,
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.10Raul
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.5Rick Fri Dec 17, 2010 08:02 pm PST Report Abuse
Asylum seekers need to keep their filthy no good mouths shut and should be immediately deported with not excuses
Replies (1)
 
8Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.6Eyeseeyou Fri Dec 17, 2010 08:00 pm PST Report Abuse
who told them to come they were brakeing the law and got killed for it there fault no one else