NBC's late-night fiasco tops 2010's stories

By JAKE COYLE, AP Entertainment Writer – Mon Dec 20, 1:00 pm ET
NEW YORK – What began as a grand, highly promoted experiment in late-night, ended in a fiasco that made NBC a laughing stock and captivated the country.
In January 2010, NBC sought to displace its newly crowned "Tonight Show" host, Conan O'Brien, by restoring Jay Leno to 11:35 p.m. O'Brien, however, didn't go for the 30 minute shift, and the fallout made for one of the most public debacles in network history.
Allegiances were drawn, with many supporting "Team CoCo." In the end, O'Brien left with an enormous settlement, rediscovered himself in a cross-country concert-hall road trip, and finally ended up with a new show at TBS. Leno retook the "Tonight Show."
The dramatic upheaval of late-night at NBC was chosen as 2010's entertainment story of the year, as voted on by Associated Press members.
There were 102 ballots submitted from U.S. news organizations that make up the AP's membership. The voters were asked to rank the top 10 entertainment stories of the year, with the first-place story getting 10 points, the second-place story receiving nine points, and so on.
The late-night saga received 797 points, almost twice as much as any other story.
Here are 2010's top entertainment stories:
_1. NBC LATE-NIGHT ERUPTS: NBC Universal chief Jeff Zucker presented NBC's reshuffle plan in the first week of 2010, claiming something had to be done about the ratings for both "The Jay Leno Show" and O'Brien's "Tonight Show." The fallout lasted weeks before O'Brien left with millions in tow and a galvanized fan base. Equally surprising was his final destination — TBS, where his show "Conan" premiered in November.
_2. "AVATAR" MAKES HISTORY: For a substantial part of 2010, James Cameron's sci-fi epic "Avatar" was playing to packed movie theaters. It smashed the record set by Cameron's "Titanic" and, by early February, became the highest grossing film of all time, domestically and globally. It took in nearly $750 million domestically, a number further padded by the later release of an extended cut.
_3. TABLETS UNLEASH APPS: Before Apple CEO Steve Jobs debuted the iPad in May, there was plenty of skepticism about the potential of tablet computers. But as people began to familiarize themselves with the device, it became clear that it had further unlocked an app universe of games, entertainment and media. Other tablets have since been released, and media companies have increasingly developed apps.
_4. INTERNET AND TV MOVE CLOSER: Netflix transformation from a DVD company to a streaming video company came at the same time that devices such as Google TV were pushing the Internet and television closer. By the end of the year, fears were growing that cable customers were beginning to cut the cord and depend on Web access for TV shows.
_5. COWELL LEAVES "IDOL": Simon Cowell made his exit from "American Idol" official in January. He left to focus on his British TV hit "The X Factor," of which an American version is in the works.
_6. BEATLES COME TO iTUNES: The most famous of the few remaining holdouts from iTunes, the Beatles, finally caved, signifying the end of a chapter in the digitizing of music. More than 2 million individual songs and 450,000 copies of Beatles albums were sold in the first week.
_7. PRINCE WILLIAM GETS ENGAGED: After years of dating, Prince William proposed to his girlfriend Kate Middleton with his mother's diamond-and-sapphire engagement ring. They'll be wed at Westminster Abbey this spring.
_8. BULLOCK WINS OSCAR, DIVORCES: Sandra Bullock had a remarkably eventful year, winning a best-actress Oscar, adopting a baby boy and divorcing her husband Jesse James after it was revealed that he cheated on her.
_9. "LOST" ENDS: More than 13 million watched the ABC desert island mystery conclude after six seasons of twisted plot lines, alternate realities and stupefying cliffhangers.
_10. LARRY KING QUITS: Larry King hung up his suspenders, calling it quits after 25 years of "Larry King Live" on CNN. The 77-year-old talk-show host made his last broadcast of the show in December. British talk-show host and "America's Got Talent" judge Piers Morgan takes over the time slot in January.


1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Dubs 2 hours ago Report Abuse
If you're going to rot your brain at least do it with meth. Just say no to TV.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Gee Gee 3 hours ago Report Abuse
I really have watched little of these shows since Johnny Carson left..Never cared that much for Leno and Conon, I never could get into, Maybe its the generation Gap, don't watch much TV as its little that appeals to me, watch more on PBS, but than I'm a Reader, so I really. rather read the news, that way I think I get more of the Story, Facts...Movies, its rare I find one I want to pay to see...I have the internet, have never seen where cable was worth what they charge, Yes, I've seen it in my travels a lot...but have not had it for years...
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Wanetta 3 hours ago Report Abuse
I have a feeling conan will be a very difficult trivia question in 10 yrs time, shame he is a good writer with some good bits. If nbc had any brains they would never have offered him the tonight show job and just paid for some more writers for his show. Who was conan before NBC? a writer for the simpsons. It was conan's dream to be the host of tonight, sometimes a dream can blind you into walking into a nightmare situation.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.9Justcruisingby
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.9Postanote
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment
 
9Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Joe 4 hours ago Report Abuse
Late night TV died when NBC forced out Johnny Carson. Everything else is just postscript.
Replies (1)
 
5Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Bob Manning 5 hours ago Report Abuse
NBC = Nothing But Crap
CBS = The C stands for Columbia, the @#$% speaks for itself.
ABC = Always Being Contrite
Replies (1)
 
14Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2MidnightMoses 5 hours ago Report Abuse
I gave up on late nite long ago. I cringe at Letterman, I detest George Lopez' attitude that America has to just get over 30,000,000 illegal aliens, and I scratch numerous body parts,(2 in particular), trying to figure out just what about Conan is supposed to be humorous. Now I find out another self absorbed, psuedo intellectual, pompous Brit is taking over for Larry King, in addition to the others of his ilk hosting shows. I'm glad I threw Time Warner out of my house 2 years ago. With the themes of the programs, lack of original programming, and idiots that are considered celebrities, I can actually get more out of reading one article lke this, than watching all of the crap,(which it undoubtedly ALL IS!!!)
Reply
 
24Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Hello Dum Dums 5 hours ago Report Abuse
Jay's legacy will be the guy who replaced Johnny Carson and stayed too long
Replies (1)
 
12Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.10Hello Dum Dums 5 hours ago Report Abuse
Always thought Jay was a plug-in until they found somebody that was good like Conan.....he should just do a car show on Speed Channel