Art Dealer Yvon Lambert Threatens to Take Back Historic Multimillion Dollar Collection From Ungrateful Avignon

ate Deimling – Thu Dec 16, 12:55 pm ET
PARIS – For the last ten years the city of Avignon's 18th-century mansion Hôtel de Caumont has displayed Yvon Lambert's personal art holdings of 350 works by artists the noted dealer has represented as a trial run for what the French culture ministry says would be "the most important donation in France since Picasso's collection in 1974." Now, dismayed by the city's poor management of the art — which includes pieces by Sol LeWitt, Douglas Gordon, Andres Serrano, Cy Twombly, Anselm Kiefer, and Nan Goldin — Lambert has threatened to take it back.
At the recent opening of a Louise Lawler show at his Paris gallery, Lambert said that he was "seriously" considering taking back the collection, since "the mayor's office does everything to make our lives miserable, and now I'm really sick of it," according to a report in Le Figaro. The dealer claims he has continually had to pay for renovations to the building himself, that the mayor's office ignores the space's board meetings, and that the site's dampness threatens the collection and makes it difficult to borrow works from other collectors. "Avignon doesn't deserve such a gift" as his collection, Lambert said, according to FTV and AFP. "The ideal place would be to come back to Paris or near Paris."
Lambert — who opened his first Paris gallery in 1966 and later expanded to New York — loaned the works to Avignon for a 20-year period, with a view toward later donating them to the state for permanent display in the southern French town. The holdings have been estimated to be worth €63 million ($84 million), but their true value may actually be much higher. An American collector recently offered $5 million for a 1982 Twombly work that had been estimated at $1.07 million, according to Le Figaro. 
But while the residents of Avignon seem to appreciate the art — last summer, a show of Miquel Barcelo's work from the collection was extremely popular — many in the town have complained of the cost of maintaining the collection, which is funded by the city, the region, and the French state. This past weekend, Avignon's municipal council voted to grant an additional €45,000 ($60,000) to make up for the collection's 2010 budget shortfall. The council also voted to renew the agreement between the city, the region, and the French state for the maintenance of the collection through 2013. Mayor Marie-Josée Roig told AFP that the vote had already been planned before Lambert's expression of dissatisfaction, adding that the collection "is important to the city and I'm sure that it will stay in Avignon."
Yvon Lambert was at the Hôtel de Caumont on Saturday for the opening of his collection's new show, which includes Serrano's "Piss Christ" and Twombly's "Phaedrus," the latter a white painting valued at $2.8 million that was notoriously smeared with red lipstick when a woman kissed it in 2007. (This time, however, the work is behind a security barrier.) Perhaps Lambert will take the show's title — "Je crois aux miracles" or "I Believe in Miracles" — as a sign that there's a place for his collection in Avignon after all.

0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Eagreen3 Thu Dec 16, 2010 11:48 am PST Report Abuse
The Chinese have money, and want to become the center of the world; here is a chance for them to make a big statement. Make and offer to build a new building dedicated to these works and move them to China. Should make a BIG statement about who are the new world leaders.
Reply