Future teachers must show, not just tell, skills

By CHRIS WILLIAMS, Associated Press – Tue Nov 2, 4:15 pm ET
ST. PAUL, Minn. – Standing at the edge of a pond surrounded by her class of fourth-graders, Jasmine Zeppa filled a bucket with brown water and lectured her pupils on the science of observing and recording data. Many of the children seemed more interested in nearby geese, a passing jogger and the crunchy leaves underfoot.
Zeppa's own professor from St. Catherine University stood nearby and recorded video of it all.
"I think it went as well as it possibly could have, given her experience," the professor, Susan Gibbs Goetz, said. Her snap review: The 25-year-old Zeppa could have done a better job holding the students' attention, but did well building on past lessons.
Zeppa is among the first class of aspiring teachers who are getting ready for new, more demanding requirements to receive their teacher license. A new licensing system is being tested in 19 states that includes filming student teachers in their classroom and evaluating the video, also candidates must show they can prepare a lesson, tailor it to different levels of students and present it effectively.
Most states only require that would-be teachers pass their class work and a written test. Supporters of the new system say the Teacher Performance Assessment program is a significant improvement, while others are a little more cautious in their praise, warning that it's not guaranteed it will lead to more successful teachers.
The assessments also place responsibility for grading the would-be teachers with teams of outside evaluators who have no stake in the result. Currently, the teachers-in-training are evaluated by their colleges, which want their students to get their teaching licenses.
"It's a big shift that the whole country is going through," said Misty Sato, a University of Minnesota education professor who is helping adapt the assessments for Minnesota. "It's going from 'What has your candidate experienced?' to what your candidate can do."
Minnesota is scheduled to be the first state to adopt the new system when it implements it in 2012. Four other states — Massachusetts, Ohio, Tennessee and Washington — plan to implement it within five years. Fourteen more states are running pilots.
The teacher assessment program is a joint project by a consortium made up of Stanford University, the American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education and the Council of Chief State School Officers.
Sharon P. Robinson, president of the AACTE, an umbrella group for schools that specialize in training teachers, said the assessment will mean better teachers — and ultimately more successful students.
The assessment was developed at Stanford's Center for Assessment, Learning and Equity. Ray Pecheone, the center's executive director, said more than 12,000 teaching candidates have gone through it in four years of testing in California.
California and Arizona are the only states that currently require performance testing to license teachers. Two of California's three different performance tests use video review. The third California test and the one in Arizona requires evaluators to sit in the classrooms and observe the teachers-in-training.
Pecheone said once more states adopt the program the consortium plans to track the performance of teachers who did well on the assessment to see if their students performed better on standardized tests than those of other teachers. He said the specifics of the follow-up study haven't been decided, but he said it would make extensive use of sampling.
Karen Balmer, executive director of the Minnesota Board of Teaching, said the assessments will mean more accountability for teaching colleges. For the first time, she said, her agency will have independent data that shows how well those schools are preparing students. Those that consistently produce low-performing graduates could be ordered by the state to improve their programs.
Balmer said the student teachers will pay some of the cost of the new program — probably around the $70 they now pay for the written test in Minnesota. At least initially, students will take both tests, but Balmer said the state may consider dropping the written test in the future.
Students that bomb the assessments would likely be required to retake them. If they do not test again, some teachers could still get a Minnesota teaching license if their college determines there were special circumstances — such as if the student was ill — and recommends licensure, Balmer said.
Tom Dooher, president of the Minnesota's teachers' union said the group supported it because of its emphasis on developing real-world teaching skills. "This is what education reform should look like, for practitioners by practitioners," he said.
Others are taking a wait-and-see attitude about the program.
Sandi Jacobs, vice president of the nonpartisan National Council on Teacher Quality, said she would support any test that could predict who will be a good teacher, but she's not sure performance assessments are it. Too often, she said, the passing scores on such assessments are set so low that nearly everyone passes and the weakest teachers aren't held back.
"The track record of these kinds of assessments actually being able to separate wheat from chaff is not so persuasive," Jacobs said.
For Zeppa, the prospective teacher, the pondside session with the rambunctious fourth-graders was just practice for when she goes through the assessment process in spring 2012. She said it's making her a better teacher, even if the process can be painful.
"It's nerve-racking, the idea that every mistake you make is on film," she said.
___
Online:
Teacher Performance Assessment Consortium: http://bit.ly/aoFcPC


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Jennifer Wed Nov 17, 2010 05:37 am PST Report Abuse
where did the world go where teachers were seen as a a benefit in society. One thing people do not understand is that we have to teacher to a state test to make sure that our students pass--because if they dont' you can get fired. so all of the enjoyment we had in school, class trips, field trips are all GONE! all the kids are are being taught how to take tests! (thanks to our no child left behind) 
Teachers need to deal with parents who at times are unrealistic--students who run the classroom and a lot will lie to parents to induce conflict. The classrooms now are so diverse in learning abilities that our lessons look like state law documents---- 
TEACHERS spend their working life to try to make students into a shining independent beacon and we get scrutinized for it....
Did you all know that even teachers have to take a standardized test? Praxis II? 2 grueling hours of writing about fictionous case studies. are these done to allow us to sympathize with our students who have to endure testing from 3rd grade to high school? Maybe..
It will take families, teachers, administrators and politicians who care to fix the "no child left behind" and change it into something our students will benefit from.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Well Now Wed Nov 10, 2010 12:22 pm PST Report Abuse
All we have to teach kids that want a real shot at using an education is where the Canadian border is. Jesus forgot to tell Canada that knowledge is of the devil.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Oldfashionron Thu Nov 04, 2010 12:57 pm PDT Report Abuse
fire all the teachers like regan did airtraffic controlers an make it private sub contractors
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0La Dee Dah Thu Nov 04, 2010 09:16 am PDT Report Abuse
The girl looking at the camera is obviously ignoring that "future" teacher
Reply
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Arturo L Thu Nov 04, 2010 07:19 am PDT Report Abuse
The saddest part of our school system is parents who were poor students, dysfunctional within a school system, who never cared for the hard work teachers put forth for the benefit of the students, who are now badmouthing teachers who are attempting to educate their equally dysfunctional children in order to break the cycle of despair and poverty. 
Young and inexperienced teachers are expected to be the equal of experienced teachers with twenty or more years in their chosen profession. Were the famous equally famous at the beginning ? Teaching is the only endeavor where apprenticeship is practiced at elite schools; the rest are influenced by politics.That's the real culprit.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Dorothy Gale Thu Nov 04, 2010 06:58 am PDT Report Abuse
there is so much WRONG with this country and most of it starts with education! And I mean the education the kid's PARENTS got! I am considered an "anal, "one of those" parents because I actually SUPERVISE, feed my kids healthy foods, spend time with them, never had them in day care, AND TEACH THEM RIGHT FROM WRONG! It is the lazy, carefree, baby boomers that are ruining this country. I hope the next generation gets a better education and steps up to the plate to save this country!! just saying.....
Replies (1)
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.6YDonchu Thu Nov 04, 2010 05:54 am PDT Report Abuse
If teachers could "show" then they wouldn't be teachers. They'd be doers and movers.

Those who can't do ... teach. Those who can't teach ... teach gym. Those who can't teach (even gym) run for public office.
Replies (4)
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1MeIsNinetySix Thu Nov 04, 2010 05:25 am PDT Report Abuse
I took my son to "meet the teacher night" this year at his middle school, he went into the seventh grade. We get to his math teacher, Mr. Simpson and he proceeds to tell me this..."I'm not too sure about the math I'll be teaching this year myself. I'm going to have to check it out myself good first, so I can teach it." A college educated man, who hasn't been out of college long (he is in his mid 20's) saying that about teaching 12-13 year old kids....The idea presented in this article is definitely a step in the right direction. Jaguar11, you make some valid points for sure, but there still are a lot of inept teachers out there that are basically stealing tax dollars (their salaries).
Replies (2)
 
9Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Jaguar11 Thu Nov 04, 2010 12:11 am PDT Report Abuse
I spent 8 years teaching high school chemistry, every evaluation wasa exemplary. I quit because I was blamed for useless parents and a broken system. America will be sorry for the lack of respect they show their teachers. I have moved on. My child will be taught by me or a select private school.
Replies (1)
 
7Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Jaguar11 Thu Nov 04, 2010 12:06 am PDT Report Abuse
Its hard for me to listen to the clowns who never listened to anything their teachers said. Lived to rue the day and then come on a message board and say those who cannot do, teach. You should be ashamed of yourself.