Cue the snow: Bears-Vikings take it outside

By PATRICK CONDON, Associated Press – 12 mins ago
MINNEAPOLIS – Thermal underwear, check. Turtleneck and sweater, check. Wind pants, gloves, absolutely. Insulated boots and hooded jacket — with Vikings logo, natch — done.
With memories of winter games at the old Metropolitan Stadium, Ellen Swanson and tens of thousands of Minnesota Vikings fans bundled up for an unusual and highly anticipated Monday night football game in a driving snowstorm against the rival Bears.
"It's not even that cold out here," Swanson said with a laugh outside TCF Bank Stadium a few hours before kickoff on the 29th anniversary of the Vikings' last outdoor game.
It was about 20 degrees and windy. "This is football how it should be," Swanson said.
The NFL thought so, too, approving the game at the University of Minnesota's outdoor stadium while repair crews worked on the snow-damaged roof of the Metrodome. When the Vikings moved the last home game of their 50th season to the campus stadium, there was a lot of scrambling to get the stadium ready and a lot of speculation about what the players would endure on an artificial grass field without any heating elements underneath to soften things up.
In a twist so perfect it almost seemed scripted, Monday brought a fresh blast of snow to the Minneapolis area with up to 5 inches forecast by kickoff. Crews of workers shot the field with blowing machines ahead of the game.
It was fallout from Minnesota's extra-snowy December that forced the Vikings back outdoors this season. A winter storm Dec. 12-13 dumped about 17 inches on the roof of the Metrodome caused its Teflon roof to fail, dumping massive piles of snow on the field. The Metrodome's operators soon decided there was no way to get the Vikings' home back into shape for Monday's game, the final home game of the team's 50th season.
Given TCF Bank Stadium holds about 50,000 football fans and was hosting a game with about 64,000 ticket holders, the Vikings decided fans would line up outside Monday and jostle for unassigned seats on a first-come, first-serve basis. Fan started to stream into the stadium about 5 p.m. in what appeared to be a largely orderly fashion. A university spokesman said there were no early reports of major problems.
Vikings officials had predicted enough fans would return tickets that no one would be turned away. Another potential disincentive was the decision not to serve liquor at the school-owned stadium, which is dry for Gopher games.
Friends Matt Ausmus and Matt Hansen weren't even born when the Vikings played their last game at Met Stadium, a 10-6 loss to Kansas City on Dec. 20, 1981. Waiting in line, they weren't too worried about scoring seats — but concerned enough that they decided not to stop elsewhere for a couple beers beforehand.
"I really think they should have thought harder about this alcohol rule," Hansen said. "If somehow we don't get in, there will definitely be beer in our near future."
Dave Johnson, a University of Minnesota senior who nabbed a $120 ticket from a scalper, said he doubted too many fans would flout the no-booze rule. "No one wants to come in here with a full bladder — it's too risky to leave your seat 'cause someone might steal it from you," he said.
For some fans, the game at TCF Bank Stadium was an early Christmas present. Old-timers have fond memories of outdoor games at old Metropolitan Stadium in suburban Bloomington, when coach Bud Grant and quarterback Fran Tarkenton led powerhouse squads that treated the bitter conditions as their ally en route to four Super Bowls.
Jennifer Kosmala, a lifelong Bears fan who flew from Chicago with a friend Monday morning to catch the game, said she was accustomed to outdoor football in the winter — and enjoyed the chance to needle Vikings fans.
"The Packers and the Bears have it right," Kosmala said. "The Vikings and the Lions — they're sort of pansies. This is what real Midwestern football is."


1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Brian 6 minutes ago Report Abuse
Bunch of divas , I believe that every TEAM sport should not single out one player over the other and that goes with the pay also. The team would be nothing without the other players , that is why I will never buy a ticket to any TEAM game no matter what sport it is , because you are just feeding into their habit
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Red November 9 minutes ago Report Abuse
This is going to be a very cool football game to watch. Like a blood sport, with Chicago looking for a little payback for the last few years.

I think the Vikings are done for the year.
Their stadium sure is.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0VINNIE S 11 minutes ago Report Abuse
Who really cares about the NFL anyway or where the hell the Vikings are playing anyway ? A bunch of over paid prima donnas, just like all the other sports athlete's, movie stars and rock stars we worship on a daily basis. Do you really think these cry baby celeberities actually care about you or your well being ? They don't even know you exist.
Replies (1)
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.09876543210 16 minutes ago Report Abuse
I think they should have played the game in Green Bay. Vikings, Bears and Packer fans all together at Lambeau. It would have been great.
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Haywood Jablome 17 minutes ago Report Abuse
Folks that have season tickets will be upset they have to take a first come first served seat, but who here cares? Right ?
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Gedatsu Kai 20 minutes ago Report Abuse
The NFL has become a joke, no wonder it is losing fans. I miss the NFL of the 70's.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Shrek 20 minutes ago Report Abuse
The Bears clinch the NFC North tonight if they press the Vikings to the concrete.

Oh and they will.
Oh yes, and they may just throw Favre to the wolves tonight I hear, too.
Oh glorious day....er, night.

PLEASE put the old man out on the field. Please.
We've been waiting a long time for this, in Chicago.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3Mindeloman 21 minutes ago Report Abuse
I read last week about them making-ready the stadium and they needed volunteers to help clear the seats of snow. Volunteers??? That sentence really shows how football has transcended from being just a sport to being something more. On the level of a soup kitchen where you can volunteer to serve the homeless and the help is desperately needed. So too the vikings' organization. People will die without their football and they need those volunteers. Can you say, "taking advantage". The NFL is so high and mighty now that people are willing to work hard in the cold to benefit their team and have a part of it for NOTHING. What's even more crazy is the lengths people will go to support a team that cares nothing about them. How much does an official jersey costs these days? Who cares! It's all for the team. Last year my son was in the hospital for 2 weeks with pnemonia. Jerry Jones never showed-up to check on him. Not even a phone call. Why would I spend my money on that guy when he cleary cares nothing about me. All football is, is entertaiment and nothing more. The world will continue to turn without it.
Replies (2)
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Common Sense 23 minutes ago Report Abuse
You'd have to be a complete idiot to live in this barren $hithole anyway
Replies (1)
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1J W R 61 27 minutes ago Report Abuse
The pros are so spoiled