Nuns' Honus Wagner card goes to new buyer

By BEN NUCKOLS, Associated Press – 8 mins ago
BALTIMORE – It's been a blessed year for the School Sisters of Notre Dame, who catapulted to prominence when they put a rare Honus Wagner baseball card up for auction to support their charitable mission.
Problem was, the winning bidder never paid up.
On Monday, the Baltimore-based order of Roman Catholic nuns got their $220,000 — the original bid — but have a different collector to thank.
Dr. Nicholas DePace (dih-PAHTCH-ee), a Philadelphia cardiologist, wired them the money and owns the card. He's been collecting sports memorabilia for 30 years, and he's a longtime client of Dallas-based Heritage Auctions. A staff member at the auction house reached out to him in early December after the winning bidder missed a 30-day deadline to purchase the card, and DePace agreed immediately to buy it.
"God bless him," said Sister Virginia Muller, the former treasurer of the School Sisters of Notre Dame, who was entrusted with the card.
The winning bidder was Doug Walton of Knoxville, Tenn., who owns seven sports card stores in the Southeast. He told The AP at the time that he was willing to overpay for the card because of the story behind it and said he was the highest bidder by $45,000.
Walton did not return a message left on his cell phone Monday. Greg Rohan, president of Heritage Auctions, said the auction house had been unable to reach Walton.
"Once in a blue moon, every auction company has a strange situation like this," Rohan said. "It doesn't happen very often, but you have to be prepared for it."
The Wagner card, produced as part of the T206 series between 1909 and 1911, is the most sought-after baseball card in history. About 60 are known to exist, and one in near-perfect condition sold in 2007 for $2.8 million, the highest price ever for a baseball card.
The School Sisters of Notre Dame inherited their card from the brother of a deceased nun after he died earlier this year. It had been in the man's possession since 1936 and was unknown to the sports memorabilia marketplace. It's in poor condition, but collectors prize any Wagner card.
The American Tobacco Company ended production of the card shortly after it began. According to sports historians, Wagner was either upset about his image being used to promote tobacco products or the shortstop simply thought he wasn't being paid enough.
"The Flying Dutchman," played for played for 21 seasons, 18 of them with the Pittsburgh Pirates. He compiled a .328 career batting average and was one of the five original inductees into baseball's Hall of Fame.
DePace, a Catholic, said he was moved that the nuns planned to use the money for their schools and ministries for the poor in 35 countries and didn't want to see them shortchanged. He bid on the card when it was auctioned but thought the price was too high. Now, he feels the price is more than fair.
"I'm ecstatic about it. ... I will argue that this Wagner card is the most significant Wagner card because it's the American story about how people just get a baseball card and they hide it in the safe," DePace said. "There's a treasure there, and the treasure comes out, and now the treasure's going to be shared with tens of thousands of people."
Muller said the order wasn't informed until Monday about the snag in the sale. She said she was surprised by the 11th-hour development but said Heritage Auctions handled the matter appropriately.
"If we hadn't received the money today, then I would have been concerned," Muller said. "They went ahead and pursued someone else. There was no reason for us to know."
DePace's vast memorabilia collection includes game-worn uniforms of Ty Cobb, Babe Ruth, Jackie Robinson and Wilt Chamberlain and a game ball from the 1958 NFL championship game between the Baltimore Colts and New York Giants, known as "The Greatest Game Ever Played."
He plans to open a nonprofit museum next year in Collingswood, N.J., a Philadelphia suburb, to showcase his holdings, and will display the card there.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Total Jim 7 minutes ago Report Abuse
With that much money they can pay alt least three more victims of the priests......this church needs to be gone.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Henry 37 minutes ago Report Abuse
It's been an interesting story. The new owner must be very excited. Sickening to see the anticatholicism in some of these comments; this is 2010!
Replies (3)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.7AnotherOne 1 hour ago Report Abuse
The money can go to a family of an abused altar boy ...
Reply
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Berry 2 hours ago Report Abuse
Well, it's nice to see such a large amount of money being used wisely.
Reply
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.8Duke D 2 hours ago Report Abuse
What a waste. How many priests with "special tastes" will get their legal bills paid by that card now?
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.4Phillip 3 hours ago Report Abuse
bi-female, conservative left, skeptical, baseball fanny, love to hate me, OK.
Reply
 
5Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Kevin 4 hours ago Report Abuse
If the buyer never had the money to pay for it, why did the company even sell it at least with like a deposit where, you are #1 pre-approved, #2 if you are the winning bidder, they will take that deposit as non-refundable, don't they got guidelines or something? If you didn't win auction, the auction company would immediately refunded back those bidders bank accounts. This was a poorly ran auction, they were lucky to find a person still willing to pay same amount. If the person failed to pay the person say within that certain amount of time, they will lose their deposit of say at least $5,000.00 down payment, so it will attract serious bidders not that non-paying bidder that was trying to screw some nuns for a card, too. Why would you even try to steal a baseball card from nuns? It's like stealing from God. I hope the auction learns from this, next time.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.11Jules
Comment hidden due to low rating. Show Comment
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.10G 4 hours ago Report Abuse
I sure hope those nuns are taxed like any other business for the income generated from that card.
Replies (2)
 
7Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Slap Chop Sat Nov 06, 2010 06:30 pm PDT Report Abuse
This card is the Holy Grail of Baseball Cards. There are I think 525 diffrent cards to the T 206 set. With some variations. The backs of the cards are just as colectible as the fronts. Wish I wouldve owned this specific card, a original not a reprint.