Mike Miller to dress for Miami Heat for 1st time

By TIM REYNOLDS, AP Sports Writer – 1 hr 16 mins ago
MIAMI – When Mike Miller arrived for work Monday night, the Miami Heat had a gift waiting in his locker: A jersey.
Miller was in uniform for the first time this season when the Heat faced the Dallas Mavericks, though coach Erik Spoelstra said the swingman was not guaranteed of getting minutes. Miller sat out the first 29 games while recovering from a broken thumb and torn ligament in his right hand — the one he shoots with.
Spoelstra and Heat president Pat Riley met Monday afternoon to decide if the time was right to let Miller dress.
"We both decided that he's ready to suit," Spoelstra said.
Ordinarily, the Heat prefer to have injured players go through one full practice before returning to the lineup. Because Miami won't have one of those until Wednesday, Miller got the go-ahead.
"It's very encouraging," Heat forward LeBron James said. "Not only for us, but for him personally. I know he's been really excited to try to get back healthy and get back playing with this team. We've been waiting for him."
For his career, Miller has averaged 13.7 points on 46 percent shooting, 41 percent shooting from 3-point range. He was second in the NBA in 3-point shooting last season, making 48 percent, and signed with Miami this past summer.
Miller likely will be used in short stints for the next few games, especially since there isn't a glaring need for help right now in the Miami rotation. The Heat entered Monday on a 12-game winning streak, and Miller himself said he might have to sacrifice some minutes for now to keep things rolling.
"I'd like to play," Miller said before Spoelstra and Riley made their decision. "But I also understand the big picture."
Miller was hurt Oct. 20 when his hand got tangled in James' jersey during a drill in practice and had surgery two days later. He has been shooting for several weeks, has been working on his conditioning throughout the recovery and was cleared for contact last week — about a month ahead of the schedule originally expected.
Miller will go through a workout Tuesday, then practice Wednesday before the team flies to Phoenix for a Thursday game against the Suns. He's been clamoring to play since last week and hoped to make his debut last Friday when the Heat visited the New York Knicks.
"Sometimes as a player you feel ready before everyone else feels you're ready. ... Mike is ready," Heat guard Dwyane Wade said.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1La Muerte Thu Oct 21, 2010 04:21 pm PDT Report Abuse
The Heat will be coming to your town soon and will crush your team!!!!
Deal with it!!!!!!!!!
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Admrjp Thu Oct 21, 2010 01:28 pm PDT Report Abuse
HA! Karma for LePuke!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Andy Fri Jul 16, 2010 10:26 am PDT Report Abuse
May be Miami should change their name to Miami 'Friends' instead of Miami heat. No hate, good for them.
No one complained when Boston put together their 'dream team', i guess miami got into controvesy, partly due to the way Lebron left the cavs and partly due to sour grapes feeling of teams that did not get lebron.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Eric Thu Jul 15, 2010 10:04 pm PDT Report Abuse
Lebron is a great talent, but he has never won anything. He does not have the killer instinct that true champions like Kobe and MJ have. Lebron is going to be the next Sir Charles- a huge talent that cannot win a ring.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Robert B Thu Jul 15, 2010 09:28 pm PDT Report Abuse
KEEP BUILDING MIAMI FEW MORE PLAYERS AND IT'S A WRAP
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Scot Thu Jul 15, 2010 09:21 pm PDT Report Abuse
people acting like miller is all that.all of a sudden there is alot of wanna bees miami fans.they still have to worry about the celtics, magics and the bulls.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Bob Thu Jul 15, 2010 07:22 pm PDT Report Abuse
Miami will be a lot hotter for the less paid when things go south. I can't wait. Do you really think the current coach can handle all the egos and talents? Kobe is really the one to pass MJ. King Lebron Mohron just made the biggest mistake.
Reply
 
2Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3BIG AL Thu Jul 15, 2010 06:53 pm PDT Report Abuse
IT'S ALL ABOUT THE MONEY AND NOT THE SPORT!! THE NBA NEEDS TO PUT A STOP TO ALL THE MONEY BEING SPENT, IF THIS KEEPS UP THEY WILL PUT A LOT OF TEAMS OUT OF BUSINESS. THE PEOPLE WILL NOT BEABLE TO PAY TO SEE THE TEAMS PLAY ANY MORE, WE HAVE IDIOTS THEY CAN NOT READ OR WRITE , AS MILLIONAIRS AND HAVE NO IDEA HOW TO HANDLE MONEY!!!
Replies (3)
 
4Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Private Thu Jul 15, 2010 05:35 pm PDT Report Abuse
This is starting to remind me of when the Lakers signed everyone to get a championship. Only difference is those players were older and knew how to control their monster egos. I honestly want to see how Wade, James and Bosh handle being in a pressure situation where EACH of their natural instincts are to try and win the game. Could we see Wade take a risky 3 and blow it with Lebron or Bosh or even Miller open in the paint? Could we see Lebron try to display his "skills" and blow the game? Only time will tell. I'm not hating I'm simply saying the competitive spirit of the 3 (well now 4 with Miller) could pose some interesting problems if all of their egos aren't in check.
Reply
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.6La Muerte Thu Jul 15, 2010 05:19 pm PDT Report Abuse
Looks like Kobe will be the one getting raped now.
Reply