Police: Fla. man cyber-stalked sorority pledges

By BILL KACZOR, Associated Press – Fri Dec 10, 11:30 pm ET
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. – A Florida man accused of using Facebook to harass Louisiana State University sorority pledges and pressure them into sending him nude pictures also is a suspect in other states, authorities said Friday.
Campus police officers at LSU and Florida Department of Law Enforcement agents on Thursday arrested 27-year-old Mitchell Hill at a home in Key West, where he works as a chef at a Cuban restaurant.
He's facing only Louisiana charges so far, but FDLE spokesman Keith Kameg said Hill is suspected in cyber-stalking investigations by police at the University of Florida, Florida State University and possibly other Florida schools.
Similar cases also have been reported at Auburn University, the University of Alabama and University of Tennessee, but investigators said there probably are others.
"It's really a huge sense of relief" knowing there has been an arrest, said 18-year-old Florida State student Ashley Atchison, who temporarily left school because she was so traumatized.
Hill, who moved to Florida from Cincinnati within the past two years, was being held without bond in the Monroe County Jail after he refused to waive extradition during a court appearance Friday in Key West.
He is charged with two counts of extortion, two counts of video voyeurism and 12 counts of attempted video voyeurism. Extortion is the most serious charge, which carries a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison. The video voyeurism charge can carry up to five years in prison.
Hill's lawyer, Richard Fowler, said he was representing Hill locally on a drunken driving charge and in extradition proceedings. He had no comment on the charges.
Campus police in Louisiana and Florida say victims in both states were contacted through Facebook by someone claiming to be an alumna of the sorority they were pledging. The stalker used fake names that included "Marissa" and "Lexie," asked intimate questions, and demanded that victims disrobe on camera or send nude photographs.
If they didn't comply, the stalker would threaten their standing with their sorority, said LSU police Sgt. Blake Tabor.
Atchison said in a telephone interview from her home in Jacksonville that she refused the demands for images by claiming she didn't have a camera. Then "Lexie" began playing mind games and suggested a couple girls who were outside her dorm would "handle" her.
"I started going to the counseling center because I was having whacky dreams and I was put on medicine because I wasn't sleeping," Atchison said. "It's just kind of creepy when somebody knows where your dorm is, what your class schedule is."
Hill was resourceful in finding personal information about the victims on Facebook, Tabor said.
"What we're hoping is that through this investigation that it'll heighten people's awareness of the information that they're putting out there and just how easily attainable it is," Tabor said.
LSU investigators had been working on the case since early October and finally got a break when Facebook provided data that led to Hill, Tabor said.
Authorities will ask Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal to request that Hill be extradited to Louisiana. But that won't happen until a drunken driving charge against Hill is resolved in Florida.
FDLE agents also served a search warrant when Hill was arrested. They seized his computer and turned it over to LSU police, Assistant State Attorney Mark Wilson said.
Atchison, meanwhile, is returning in January to Florida State.
"It's been a long time coming," she said. "But I'm very excited he's finally caught and not going to do this to any other girls."


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Cheluzal Wed Dec 15, 2010 05:11 pm PST Report Abuse
Left school because of the trauma? Yeah....there is this neat little FB function: it's called "block."
Get a grip--like kids who are being harrassed on FB--I tell them: stop being their friends and allowing it. They just want the prestige of [how many friends can I get].
Reply
 
9Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Allan Sat Dec 11, 2010 08:47 am PST Report Abuse
OK, so a college student - an individual mature enough to vote, probably drink, operate a motor vehicle, sign contracts, get an abortion - is asked via chat or Facebook to disrobe and send nude photos.

I'm trying to figure out, just how blond were these women?
Replies (1)
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Guero Sat Dec 11, 2010 06:10 am PST Report Abuse
and you dont think any of these idiotic sorority girls didnt do so? if you dont think that, you are not too bright either.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.3JayZ Sat Dec 11, 2010 05:10 am PST Report Abuse
I'm not sure this should be a crime....guys are always trying to get college girls. This guy wasn't even in the same State.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0STFU Sat Dec 11, 2010 04:27 am PST Report Abuse
WOW!!!

Like they said, nice guys finish last...
Reply
 
8Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Dansw4 Sat Dec 11, 2010 03:56 am PST Report Abuse
" Oh but when he told me to get naked and do naughty things and take pictures i thought it was my sorority sister" Whats wrong with these girls. Smarten up its not like 1990 when people didn't know much about the internet or the dangers of it. Smart enough to get into college but not to know you can't trust everyone on the net to be who they say they are yet huh?
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0JackieF Sat Dec 11, 2010 03:27 am PST Report Abuse
I just signed onto Facebook and have my settings at maximum security. If someone wants to read my profile, they have to be added as a friend. I don't add on friends unless I know who they are. There are a lot of interesting strangers out there and it's tempting to reach out and say something to them. I was surfing around looking at random people and clicked onto an interesting name. It turned out to be a young woman from Syria. From a cultural point of view, I was tempted to request her for a friend. But I thought what if she's not who she says she is? Maybe she's nice, what if she has a crazy cousin who hates Westerners? So many ifs and possible circumstances. So I let it go. If you don't do things this way, stuff like this happens. Predators are contacting young people in the guise of other concerned young people, telling them to change their icons to a cartoon character. Turns out the cartoon icons are a signal to these guys that this one's for the pickins. You really shouldn't talk to strangers! Use the most secure settings and it won't happen.
Replies (1)
 
6Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.1Ronald C Fri Dec 10, 2010 10:39 pm PST Report Abuse
C'mon now.............you don't have to apply a lot of "pressure" to get these @#$%s to send nude photos......
Reply
 
11Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0JonaD Fri Dec 10, 2010 09:59 pm PST Report Abuse
Older people, who have been online for years, KNOW either through direct experience, or while partisipating or observing groups, that many people online... ARE CRAZY!

That's why being anonymous, like YAHOO has us here, is a GOOD IDEA. One should NEVER reveal their identity of the details of their lives TOO EASILY... to an open mic, or rather, the public in an open forum.

What FaceBook did, was pretend all of the data on this, all of the experience of thousands, even millions of users... no longer mattered! They had people invite other people, who invited others people into a low security, no guideline, veritable slaughterhouse of revelation and unmasking! Mostly inexperienced members by the millions joined FaceBook, believing everything was being taken care of... WELL FOLKS, when you give ALL THAT INFORMATION ABOUT YOURSELF TO STRANGERS... YOU ARE OPEN TO BE EXPLOITED. There are allot of bad people online, and the open friendly easy access FaceBook makes your stuff available, means these stories will ONLY increase!
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2DraftDoc9 Fri Dec 10, 2010 09:34 pm PST Report Abuse
Simpletons!! Now, see hya Scarlett-Mari. It is vayree, vayree impodant to get in tha propa soroatee and meet tha rait kinda yung main!! Now you do whateva it takes. How else will you end up the 3rd-5th wife of a Strom Thurman or a Newt Gingrich!!