Why Nokia Is in Deep Trouble With MeeGo

Keir Thomas – Wed Dec 8, 1:32 pm ET
Beware open source. Just ask AOL. All it wanted in the late 1990s was a killer browser to destroy Microsoft's Internet Explorer. They figured the best way of getting this was to make Netscape open source. Four long years later, AOL finally got what it wanted, just about, but the world had changed almost beyond recognition. Internet Explorer was dominant; the game was over.
In those four years the open source guys had entirely rebuilt Netscape from the ground up, defining technical standards still in use today. They built a world-class bug filing system too. The trouble is that AOL really, really needed a killer browser as quickly as possible. If ithad received it, computing history as we know it today might be very different.
I'm starting to think that Nokia might be in an AOL's former situation with MeeGo, the operating system for mobile devices that was created by the merger of the Maemo and Moblin projects. It's true that as a project, MeeGo is relatively young, but it's based on established and mature technology that first saw the light of day in 2005 as something called Maemo.
Since that time, Nokia has been heralding Maemo and then MeeGo as the future of its phone business, and in doing so have put significant faith in the open source universe.
What Nokia really needs right now is a killer smartphone OS--n phones it's selling at this very moment, during this holiday season, which is sure to go down in history as being the defining moment for smartphone sales. The revolution starts here, but Nokia isn't 100 percent present.
Until MeeGo produces the goods, Nokia is stuck with Symbian, an aging, creaking operating system that's stretched almost to breaking point in Nokia's latest phone releases.
Nokia is one of the chief sponsors of MeeGo, which is slated for its first phone release in the middle of next year. By that time Android and Apple's iOS will be extremely well established. It'll be game over for any other competitor because history has shown that most technology marketplaces only support two main players.
What's rather strange is that lots of people are expecting MeeGo to be a blockbuster of an OS that will finally show the world how mobile phones should work.
Again, this sounds familiar, and it's wise to question the proclamations of open source people. For example, the Linux kernel was considered a temporary measure for a significant part of its history. It was believed that something called GNU Hurd would eventually take its rightful place at the centre of the open source operating system world.
The trouble is that Hurd kept getting redesigned, with ever more ambitious ideas getting mixed in, and it never actually got close to completion. Even now it still isn't finished.
Open source developers have a terrible tendency to believe that those two birds in the bush are worth more than one in the hand, and they have an insane faith in the beauty of perfection.
God help any corporation that relies on open source to deliver the goods quickly.
As such, it was immensely depressing to hear the comments of Marko Ahtisaari, senior vice president of design at Nokia, who spoke Wednesday about how MeeGo would revolutionize smartphones. He talked of one-handed phone use, and how MeeGo would somehow reduce the amount of time users spent staring at the screen.
Call me a cynic, but this sounds like extremely characteristic open source waffle: lots of cool ideas, but essentially vaporous. Why isn't MeeGo here right now? Seriously. A lot is riding on this. How close is it to release? Where are the phones that feature it? In short, where's the beef?
As far as I can tell, only one actual phone on the planet is able to run MeeGo at the moment: the Nokia N900, an entertainingly expensive Internet tablet/phone hybrid mostly bought by hobbyists. And the N900 doesn't even run MeeGo in any official capacity. The N900 is simply serving as a testbed for MeeGo programmers. Nokia doesn't officially support any consumer who runs MeeGo.
It's not just Nokia that's betting the farm on the ghostly spectre of MeeGo. Intel and AMD are hoping it will inject some life into their mobile phone chip businesses. Both are stunningly far behind market-leader ARM which, via the chip designs it licenses to third-party manufacturers, has the mobile phone market pretty much sewn up.
I wish the developers of MeeGo all the luck in the world, really, and as a longtime user of Maemo (which MeeGo is based on) I have a lot of respect for their work. But it's time that Nokia woke up and smelled the coffee. Android is the future. There isn't any question. Nokia has fallen into the trap of believing open source hype. It's backing the wrong horse, and there's no dishonor involved in cancelling the bet before the horse limps home.
Keir Thomas has been writing about computing since the last century, and more recently has written several best-selling books. You can learn more about him at http://keirthomas.com and his Twitter feed is @keirthomas.


0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Bob Mon Dec 13, 2010 05:13 pm PST Report Abuse
Nokia always made decent if not superior hardware, seldom had reception problems on their phones even when others could not get one bar. Maybe they should stick to hardware and adopt android and throw in their own little apps?
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0JoseT Thu Dec 09, 2010 11:02 pm PST Report Abuse
Old habits are difficult to change. That is the simple reason Nokia is loosing the market. Launched in 2005, Meego (Meemo/Mobilin) have the potential to the defacto smartphone OS and they should encourage the community or dev groups to take it forward and keep the vibrancy. However, the comparison made with Nokia is and AOL seems to be fair, but Nokia never considered to be Microsoft of mobile phones. They never threaten other companies :-)
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Mr Zox Thu Dec 09, 2010 11:55 am PST Report Abuse
sooo, and why are they in trouble?
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Praxis Wed Dec 08, 2010 09:50 pm PST Report Abuse
I agree with Peter M. I think Nokia should have bought Palm when they had the chance. It could have kept them both alive. And not just cuz I have been using palm since long before smart phones were ever invented. I happen to believe in our free market economy and the idea that more competition is better for the consumer. But that competition has to be something that can be in the game.
Sadly nokia is too little too late. And as for Palm OS that is now in the hands of HP. They have a solid product with some people who are still willing to be loyal customers (myself included). But they are going to have to come out with something as revolutionary as the Palm Piolet was if they hope to have a snowflakes chance (I, for one hope they do).
Replies (1)
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Seethepositive Wed Dec 08, 2010 06:25 pm PST Report Abuse
the newest technology isn't always the best. when all the connections have a problem what do we go back to. that is the brainchild.
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2Hockeyplyr67 Wed Dec 08, 2010 05:59 pm PST Report Abuse
Who or what is Nokia? ha
Reply
 
0Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Jamie Wed Dec 08, 2010 03:19 pm PST Report Abuse
I'm hoping the killer platform will be the Symbian^3 OS Kernel with SPB Mobile Shell 5.0 as the U.I. SPB were holding back selling version 5.0 as a retail product for Symbian. But seeing as Nokia has taken Symbian back in-house, I don't see any business sense for SPB to hold out on a commercial release for Symbian UI.

Fingers crossed that it will be available when my E7-00 is.
Reply
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.2ND Wed Dec 08, 2010 02:14 pm PST Report Abuse
I think Nokia has been dead since a while now. Being the clear leader that they were, they should have mastered the smartphone concept a long time ago. In terms of pure innovation in the mobile space I haven't seen anything significant from them since a decade!!! Its the same like MSFT just too bloated and too slow to move and make the right moves.
Reply
 
3Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0MartinM Wed Dec 08, 2010 02:08 pm PST Report Abuse
Personally, I think this article misses the point. It talks about this holiday season being the turning point and about open source development being slow, but the reality is that the game was over some time ago for Nokia smartphones. What really nailed them was that they originally had the best phones, and being the best they stuck with it and evolved it, and in the meantime were overtaken by a revolution. Microsoft suffered from a very similar problem, the difference being that Windows Mobile was always an inferior product. Both companies should have gone the revolutionary route the moment the iPhone appeared. Apple could have been overtaken, but once Android was loose the game was over. As for "it's not too late", what alternative route do they realistically have? The only alternative to coming up with something they believe is good enough to get them back in the game would be to switch to Android, become a simple hardware manufacturer who dabbles in tailored user interfaces and compete with HTC instead of Google or Apple.
Replies (1)
 
1Please sign in to rate this comment up.Please sign in to rate this comment down.0Drax Wed Dec 08, 2010 01:59 pm PST Report Abuse
I think that they just should continue development on Maemo and production of Maemo-based phones (N900 really rocks).