
Thomas Jefferson
This article is about the United States president. For other uses, see Thomas Jefferson (disambiguation).
Thomas Jefferson

3rd President of the United States
In office
March 4, 1801 – March 4, 1809
Vice President	Aaron Burr (1801–1805),
George Clinton (1805–1809)
Preceded by	John Adams
Succeeded by	James Madison
2nd Vice President of the United States
In office
March 4, 1797 – March 4, 1801
President	John Adams
Preceded by	John Adams
Succeeded by	Aaron Burr
1st United States Secretary of State
In office
March 22, 1790 – December 31, 1793
President	George Washington
Preceded by	John Jay
(as Secretary of Foreign Affairs)
Succeeded by	Edmund Randolph
United States Ambassador to France
In office
1785–1789
Appointed by	Congress of the Confederation
Preceded by	Benjamin Franklin
Succeeded by	William Short
Delegate from Virginia to The Congress of the Confederation
In office
November 1, 1783 – May 7, 1784
Preceded by	James Madison
Succeeded by	Richard Henry Lee
2nd Governor of Virginia
In office
June 1, 1779 – June 3, 1781
Preceded by	Patrick Henry
Succeeded by	William Fleming
Representative from Albemarle County to Virginia House of Delegates
In office
1776–1779
Delegate from Virginia to The Second Continental Congress
In office
1775–1776
Representative from Albemarle County to House of Burgesses[1]
In office
1769–1776
Born	April 13 [O.S. April 2] 1743
Shadwell, Virginia
Died	July 4, 1826 (aged 83)
Charlottesville, Virginia
Political party	Democratic-Republican
Spouse(s)	Martha Wayles Skelton Jefferson
Children	Martha Washington Jefferson
Jane Randolph Jefferson
Mary Wayles Jefferson
Lucy Elizabeth Jefferson I
Lucy Elizabeth Jefferson II
Alma mater	The College of William & Mary
Occupation	planter
lawyer
teacher
Religion	see below
Signature	


Classic engraving of Jefferson on Louisiana Purchase Exposition issue of 1904.
Thomas Jefferson (April 13, 1743 – July 4, 1826)[2] was the third President of the United States (1801–1809) and the principal author of the Declaration of Independence (1776). Jefferson was one of the most influential Founding Fathers, known for his promotion of the ideals of republicanism in the United States. Jefferson envisioned America as the force behind a great "Empire of Liberty"[3] that would promote republicanism and counter the imperialism of the British Empire.
Major events during his presidency include the Louisiana Purchase (1803) and the Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804–1806), as well as escalating tensions with both Britain and France that led to war with Britain in 1812, after he left office.
As a political philosopher, Jefferson was a man of the Enlightenment and knew many intellectual leaders in Britain and France. He idealized the independent yeoman farmer as exemplar of republican virtues, distrusted cities and financiers, and favored states' rights and a strictly limited federal government. Jefferson supported the separation of church and state[4] and was the author of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (1779, 1786). He was the eponym of Jeffersonian democracy and the cofounder and leader of the Democratic-Republican Party, which dominated American politics for 25 years. Jefferson served as the wartime Governor of Virginia (1779–1781), first United States Secretary of State (1789–1793), and second Vice President of the United States (1797–1801).
A polymath, Jefferson achieved distinction as, among other things, a horticulturist, political leader, architect, archaeologist, paleontologist, musician, inventor, and founder of the University of Virginia. When President John F. Kennedy welcomed 49 Nobel Prize winners to the White House in 1962 he said, "I think this is the most extraordinary collection of talent and of human knowledge that has ever been gathered together at the White House – with the possible exception of when Thomas Jefferson dined alone." [5] To date, Jefferson is the only president to serve two full terms in office without vetoing a single bill of Congress. Jefferson has been consistently ranked by scholars as one of the greatest of U.S. presidents.
Contents [hide]
1 Early life and education
1.1 Childhood
1.2 Education
1.3 After college
1.4 Monticello
1.5 Toward revolution
1.6 Drafting a declaration
2 Political career from 1774 to 1800
2.1 State legislator
2.2 Governor of Virginia
2.3 Member of Congress
2.4 Minister to France
2.5 Secretary of State
2.6 Break from office
2.7 Election of 1796 and Vice Presidency
2.8 Election of 1800
3 Presidency 1801–1809
3.1 Administration, Cabinet and Supreme Court appointments 1801–1809
4 Father of a university
5 Death
6 Appearance and temperament
7 Interests and activities
8 Political philosophy and views
8.1 Francophilia
8.2 Banks and bankers
8.3 Individual rights
8.4 States' rights
8.5 Carrying of arms
8.6 Corporations
8.7 Judiciary
8.8 Rebellion to restrain government and retain individual rights
8.9 Self-esteem
8.10 Women in politics
9 Religion
10 Native American policy
10.1 Acculturation and assimilation
10.2 War and removal west
11 On slavery
12 Jefferson on US postage
13 Jefferson's role in US currency
14 Reputation and memorials
14.1 Reputation
14.2 Memorials
15 Marriage and family
15.1 Acknowledged wife and children
15.2 Alleged mixed-race children
15.3 Ancestry
16 Writings
17 See also
18 Notes
19 Bibliography
19.1 Biographies
19.2 Politics and ideas
19.2.1 Religion
19.3 Legacy and historiography
19.4 Primary sources
20 External links
Early life and education

Childhood
Thomas Jefferson was born on April 13, 1743 [2] into a family closely related to some of the most prominent individuals in Virginia, the third of ten children. Two died in childhood. [6] His mother was Jane Randolph, daughter of Isham Randolph of Dungeness, a ship's captain and sometime planter, first cousin to Peyton Randolph, and granddaughter of wealthy English and Scottish gentry. Jefferson's father was Peter Jefferson, a planter and surveyor in Albemarle County (Shadwell, then Edge Hill, Virginia.) He was of possible Welsh descent, although this remains unclear.[7] When Colonel William Randolph, an old friend of Peter Jefferson, died in 1745, Peter assumed executorship and personal charge of William Randolph's estate in Tuckahoe as well as his infant son, Thomas Mann Randolph, Jr. That year the Jeffersons relocated to Tuckahoe where they would remain for the next seven years before returning to their home in Albemarle. Peter Jefferson was then appointed to the Colonelcy of the county, an important position at the time.[8]
Education
In 1752, Jefferson began attending a local school run by a local Scottish Presbyterian minister. At the age of nine, Jefferson began studying Latin, Greek, and French; he learned to ride, and began to appreciate the study of nature. In 1757, when he was 14 years old, his father died. Jefferson inherited about 5,000 acres (20 km²) of land and dozens of slaves. He built his home there, which eventually became known as Monticello. After his father's death, he was taught at the school of the learned minister James Maury from 1758 to 1760. The school was in Fredericksville Parish near Gordonsville, Virginia, twelve miles (19 km) from Shadwell, and Jefferson boarded with Maury's family. There he received a classical education and studied history and science.[9]
In 1760, at the age of 16, Jefferson entered the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg. For two years he studied mathematics, metaphysics, and philosophy under Professor William Small, who introduced the enthusiastic Jefferson to the writings of the British Empiricists, including John Locke, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton (Jefferson called them the "three greatest men the world had ever produced").[10] He also perfected his French, carried his Greek grammar book wherever he went, practiced the violin, and read Tacitus and Homer. A keen and diligent student, Jefferson displayed an avid curiosity in all fields and, according to the family tradition, frequently studied fifteen hours a day. His closest college friend, John Page of Rosewell, reported that Jefferson "could tear himself away from his dearest friends to fly to his studies." He lodged and boarded at the College in the building known today as the Sir Christopher Wren Building, attending communal meals in the Great Hall, and morning and evening prayers in the Wren Chapel. Jefferson often attended the lavish parties of royal governor Francis Fauquier, where he played his violin and developed an early love for wines.[11] After graduating in 1762 with highest honors, he read law with William & Mary law professor George Wythe and was admitted to the Virginia bar in 1767.[12]
After college
On October 1, 1765, Jefferson's oldest sister Jane died at the age of 25.[13] Jefferson fell into a period of deep mourning, as he was already saddened by the absence of his sisters Mary, who had been married several years to Thomas Bolling, and Martha, who had wed earlier in July to Dabney Carr.[13] Both had moved to their husbands' residences, leaving younger siblings Elizabeth, Lucy, and the two toddlers as his companions. Jefferson was not comforted by the presence of Elizabeth or Lucy as they did not provide him with the same intellectual stimulation as his older siblings had.[13]
Jefferson would go on to handle many cases as a lawyer in colonial Virginia, managing more than a hundred cases each year between 1768 and 1773 in General Court alone, while acting as counsel in hundreds of cases.[14] Jefferson's client list included members of the Virginia's elite families, including members of his mother's family, the Randolphs.[14]
Monticello


Monticello


On April 13th of 1956 the U.S. Post Office issued a postage stamp honoring Montecello.[15]
In 1768 Thomas Jefferson started the construction of Monticello, a neoclassical mansion. Starting in childhood, Jefferson had always wanted to build a beautiful mountaintop home within sight of Shadwell.[16][17] Jefferson went greatly in debt on Monticello by spending lavishly to create a neoclassical environment, based on his study of the architect Andrea Palladio and The Orders. [18]
Monticello was also Thomas Jefferson's slave plantation. Throughout a period lasting seventy years, Thomas Jefferson owned over 600 slaves. Many of the slaves at the Monticello plantation intermarried amongst each other and produced children. Jefferson only paid a few of his trusted slaves in important positions for work done or for performing difficult tasks like cleaning chimneys or privies. Fragmentary records indicate a rich spiritual life at Monticello slave quarters, incorporating both Christian and African traditions. Although there is no record that Jefferson instructed slaves in grammar education, several enslaved men at Monticello could read and write.[19]
Toward revolution
Besides practicing law, Jefferson represented Albemarle County in the Virginia House of Burgesses beginning in 1769. Following the passage of the Coercive Acts by the British Parliament in 1774, he wrote a set of resolutions against the acts, which were expanded into A Summary View of the Rights of British America, his first published work. Previous criticism of the Coercive Acts had focused on legal and constitutional issues, but Jefferson offered the radical notion that the colonists had the natural right to govern themselves.[20] Jefferson also argued that Parliament was the legislature of Great Britain only, and had no legislative authority in the colonies.[20] The paper was intended to serve as instructions for the Virginia delegation of the First Continental Congress, but Jefferson's ideas proved to be too radical for that body.[20]
Drafting a declaration
Jefferson served as a delegate to the Second Continental Congress beginning in June 1775, soon after the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War. When Congress began considering a resolution of independence in June 1776, Jefferson was appointed to a five-man committee to prepare a declaration to accompany the resolution. The committee selected Jefferson to write the first draft probably because of his reputation as a writer. The assignment was considered routine; no one at the time thought that it was a major responsibility.[21] Jefferson completed a draft in consultation with other committee members, drawing on his own proposed draft of the Virginia Constitution, George Mason's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights, and other sources.[22]
Political career from 1774 to 1800



Rudolph Evans' statue of Jefferson with excerpts from the Declaration of Independence to the right
Jefferson showed his draft to the committee, which made some final revisions, and then presented it to Congress on June 28, 1776. After voting in favor of the resolution of independence on July 2, Congress turned its attention to the declaration. Over several days of debate, Congress made a few changes in wording and deleted nearly a fourth of the text, most notably a passage critical of the slave trade, changes that Jefferson resented.[23] On July 4, 1776, the wording of the Declaration of Independence was approved. The Declaration would eventually become Jefferson's major claim to fame, and his eloquent preamble became an enduring statement of human rights.[23]
State legislator


In John Trumbull's painting Declaration of Independence, the five-man drafting committee is presenting its work to the Continental Congress. Jefferson is the tall figure in the center laying the Declaration on the desk.
In September 1776, Jefferson returned to Virginia and was elected to the new Virginia House of Delegates. During his term in the House, Jefferson set out to reform and update Virginia's system of laws to reflect its new status as a democratic state. He drafted 126 bills in three years, including laws to abolish primogeniture, establish freedom of religion, and streamline the judicial system. In 1778, Jefferson's "Bill for the More General Diffusion of Knowledge" and subsequent efforts to reduce clerical control led to some small changes at William and Mary College.[24] While in the state legislature Jefferson proposed a bill to eliminate capital punishment for all crimes except murder and treason. His effort to end the death penalty law was defeated.[25]
Governor of Virginia
Jefferson served as governor of Virginia from 1779–1781. As governor, he oversaw the transfer of the state capital from Williamsburg to the more central location of Richmond in 1780. He continued to advocate educational reforms at the College of William and Mary, including the nation's first student-policed honor code. In 1779, at Jefferson's behest, William and Mary appointed George Wythe to be the first professor of law in an American university. Dissatisfied with the rate of changes he wanted to push through, he later became the founder of the University of Virginia, which was the first university in the United States at which higher education was completely separate from religious doctrine.
Virginia was invaded twice by the British led first by Benedict Arnold and then by Lord Cornwallis during Jefferson's term as governor. He, along with Patrick Henry and other leaders of Virginia, were but ten minutes away from being captured by Banastre Tarleton, a British colonel leading a cavalry column that was raiding the area in June 1781.[26] Public disapproval of his performance delayed his future political prospects, and he was never again elected to office in Virginia.[27] He was, however, appointed by the state legislature to Congress in 1783.
Member of Congress
See also: Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and Measures of the United States
The Virginia state legislature appointed Jefferson to the Congress of the Confederation on 6 June 1783, his term beginning on 1 November. He was a member of the committee formed to set foreign exchange rates, and in that capacity he recommended that the American currency be based on the decimal system.
Jefferson also recommended setting up the Committee of the States, to function as the executive arm of Congress when Congress was not in session.
He left Congress when he was elected a minister plenipotentiary on 7 May 1784. He became Minister to France in 1785.
Minister to France


Memorial plaque on the Champs-Élysées, Paris, France, marking where Jefferson lived while he was Minister to France. The plaque was erected after World War I to commemorate the centenary of Jefferson's founding of the University of Virginia.
Because Jefferson served as minister to France from 1785 to 1789, he was not able to attend the Philadelphia Convention. He generally supported the new constitution despite the lack of a bill of rights and was kept informed by his correspondence with James Madison.
While in Paris, he lived in a home on the Champs-Élysées. He spent much of his time exploring the architectural sites of the city, as well as enjoying the fine arts that Paris had to offer. He became a favorite in the salon culture and was a frequent dinner guest of many of the city's most prominent people. In addition, he frequently entertained others from French and European society. He and his daughters were accompanied by two slaves of the Hemings family from Monticello. Jefferson paid for James Hemings to be trained as a French chef (Hemings later accompanied Jefferson as chef when he was in Philadelphia). Sally Hemings, James' sister, had accompanied Jefferson's younger daughter overseas. Some historians speculate that Jefferson begun a long-term relationship with Sally Hemings while in Paris.[28] Both the Hemings learned French during their time in the city.[29]
From 1784 to 1785, Jefferson was one of the architects of trade relations between the United States and Prussia. The Prussian ambassador Friedrich Wilhelm von Thulemeyer and John Adams, both living in the Hague, and Benjamin Franklin in Paris, were also involved.[30]
Despite his numerous friendships with the social and noble elite, when the French Revolution began in 1789, Jefferson sided with the revolutionaries.
Secretary of State
After returning from France, Jefferson served as the first Secretary of State under George Washington (1790–1793). Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton began sparring over national fiscal policy, especially the funding of the debts of the war, with Hamilton believing that the debts should be equally shared, and Jefferson believing that each state should be responsible for its own debt (Virginia had not accumulated much debt during the Revolution). In further sparring with the Federalists, Jefferson came to equate Hamilton and the rest of the Federalists with Tories and monarchists who threatened to undermine republicanism. He equated Federalism with "Royalism," and made a point to state that "Hamiltonians were panting after...and itching for crowns, coronets and mitres."[31] Jefferson and James Madison founded and led the Democratic-Republican Party. He worked with Madison and his campaign manager John J. Beckley to build a nationwide network of Republican allies to combat Federalists across the country.
In foreign policy Jefferson was repeatedly out-maneuvered by Hamilton, who had Washington's ear. The French minister reported to Paris in 1793 that Jefferson told him, "Senator Morris and Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton, attached to the interests of England, had the greatest influence over the President's mind, and that it was only with difficulty that he [Jefferson] counterbalanced their efforts."[32] Jefferson strongly supported France against Britain when war broke out between those nations in 1793. Historian Lawrence S. Kaplan notes Jefferson's "visceral support for the French cause," while agreeing with Washington that the nation should not get involved in the fighting.[33] The arrival in 1793 of an aggressive new French minister, Edmond-Charles Genêt, caused a crisis for the Secretary of State, as he watched Genêt try to violate American neutrality, manipulate public opinion, and even go over Washington's head in appealing to the people; projects that Jefferson helped to thwart. According to Schachner, Jefferson believed that political success at home depended on the success of the French army in Europe:[34]


Thomas Jefferson, aquatint by Tadeusz Kościuszko
Jefferson still clung to his sympathies with France and hoped for the success of her arms abroad and a cordial compact with her at home. He was afraid that any French reverses on the European battlefields would give "wonderful vigor to our monocrats, and unquestionably affect the tone of administering our government. Indeed, I fear that if this summer should prove disastrous to the French, it will damp that energy of republicanism in our new Congress, from which I had hoped so much reformation."
Break from office
Jefferson at the end of 1793 retired to Monticello where he continued to orchestrate opposition to Hamilton and Washington. However, the Jay Treaty of 1794, orchestrated by Hamilton, brought peace and trade with Britain – while Madison, with strong support from Jefferson, wanted, Miller says, "to strangle the former mother country" without going to war. "It became an article of faith among Republicans that 'commercial weapons' would suffice to bring Great Britain to any terms the United States chose to dictate." Jefferson, in retirement, strongly encouraged Madison.[35]
Election of 1796 and Vice Presidency
As the Democratic-Republican candidate in 1796 he lost to John Adams, but had enough electoral votes to become Vice President (1797–1801). He wrote a manual of parliamentary procedure, but otherwise avoided the Senate.
With the Quasi-War, an undeclared naval war with France, underway, the Federalists under John Adams started a navy, built up the army, levied new taxes, readied for war, and enacted the Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798. Jefferson interpreted the Alien and Sedition Acts as an effort to suppress Democratic-Republicans rather than dangerous enemy aliens and, in fact, they were used to attack his party, with the most notable attacks coming from Matthew Lyon, a representative from Vermont. Jefferson and Madison rallied support by anonymously writing the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, which declared that the federal government had no right to exercise powers not specifically delegated to it by the states. The Resolutions meant that, should the federal government assume such powers, its acts under them could be voided by a state. The Resolutions presented the first statements of the states' rights theory, that later led to the concepts of nullification and interposition.
Election of 1800
Main article: United States presidential election, 1800
Working closely with Aaron Burr of New York, Jefferson rallied his party, attacking the new taxes especially, and ran for the Presidency in 1800. Consistent with the traditions of the times, he did not formally campaign for the position. Before the passage of the Twelfth Amendment, a problem with the new union's electoral system arose. He tied with Burr for first place in the electoral college, leaving the House of Representatives (where the Federalists still had some power) to decide the election.
After lengthy debate within the Federalist-controlled House, Hamilton convinced his party that Jefferson would be a lesser political evil than Burr and that such scandal within the electoral process would undermine the still-young regime. The issue was resolved by the House, on February 17, 1801, after thirty-six ballots, when Jefferson was elected President and Burr Vice President. Burr's refusal to remove himself from consideration created ill will with Jefferson, who dropped Burr from the ticket in 1804 after Burr killed Hamilton in a duel.
However, Jefferson's win over the Federalist John Adams in the general election was derided in its time for how the electoral college was set up under the three-fifths compromise at the Constitutional convention. Jefferson owed part of his election to the South's inflated number of Electors due to slave-holdings, which meant that twelve of Jefferson's electoral votes—his margin of victory—were derived from citizenry who were denied the vote and their full humanity.[36][37] After his election in 1800, Jefferson was derided as the "Negro President", with critics like the Mercury and New-England Palladium of Boston writing on January 20, 1801, that Jefferson had the gall to celebrate his election as a victory for democracy when he won "the temple of Liberty on the shoulders of slaves."[37][38]
Presidency 1801–1809

Main article: Presidency of Thomas Jefferson


First Jefferson stamp
~ Issue of 1856 ~
During Jefferson's presidency many federal taxes were repealed, and he sought to rely mainly on customs revenue. He pardoned people who had been imprisoned under the Alien and Sedition Acts, passed in John Adams' term, which Jefferson believed to be unconstitutional. He repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801 and removed many of Adams' "midnight judges" from office, which led to the Supreme Court deciding the important case of Marbury v. Madison. He began and won the First Barbary War (1801–1805), America's first significant overseas war, and established the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1802.
In 1803, despite his misgivings about the constitutionality of Congress's power to buy land, Jefferson bought the Louisiana Territory from France, doubling the size of the United States. The land thus acquired amounts to 23 percent of the United States today.[39]
In 1807, his former vice president, Aaron Burr, was tried for treason on Jefferson's order, but was acquitted. During the trial Chief Justice John Marshall subpoenaed Jefferson, who invoked executive privilege and claimed that as president he did not need to comply. When Marshall held that the Constitution did not provide the president with any exception to the duty to obey a court order, Jefferson backed down.
Jefferson's reputation was damaged by the Embargo Act of 1807, which was ineffective and was repealed at the end of his second term.
In 1803, President Jefferson signed into law a bill that excluded blacks from carrying the U.S. mail. Historian John Hope Franklin called the signing "a gratuitous expression of distrust of free Negroes who had done nothing to merit it." [40]
On March 3, 1807, Jefferson signed a bill making slave importation illegal in the United States.[41][42]
Administration, Cabinet and Supreme Court appointments 1801–1809
The Jefferson Cabinet
Office	Name	Term
President	Thomas Jefferson	1801–1809
Vice President	Aaron Burr	1801–1805
George Clinton	1805–1809
Secretary of State	James Madison	1801–1809
Secretary of Treasury	Samuel Dexter	1801
Albert Gallatin	1801–1809
Secretary of War	Henry Dearborn	1801–1809
Attorney General	Levi Lincoln, Sr.	1801–1804
John Breckinridge	1805–1806
Caesar A. Rodney	1807–1809
Secretary of the Navy	Benjamin Stoddert	1801
Robert Smith	1801–1809
Associate Justice
William Johnson – 1804
Henry Brockholst Livingston – 1807
Thomas Todd – 1807
States admitted to the Union:
Ohio – March 1, 1803


Painting of Jefferson by Rembrandt Peale (1805)
Father of a university

Also see: History of the University of Virginia


The Lawn, University of Virginia
After leaving the Presidency, Jefferson continued to be active in public affairs. He also became increasingly concerned with founding a new institution of higher learning, specifically one free of church influences where students could specialize in many new areas not offered at other universities. Jefferson believed educating people was a good way to establish an organized society, and felt schools should be paid for by the general public, so less wealthy people could obtain student membership as well.[43] A letter to Joseph Priestley, in January 1800, indicated that he had been planning the University for decades before its establishment.
His dream was realized in 1819 with the founding of the University of Virginia. Upon its opening in 1825, it was then the first university to offer a full slate of elective courses to its students. One of the largest construction projects to that time in North America, it was notable for being centered about a library rather than a church. No campus chapel was included in his original plans. Until his death, Jefferson invited students and faculty of the school to his home.
Jefferson is widely recognized for his architectural planning of the University of Virginia grounds, an innovative design that is a powerful representation of his aspirations for both state sponsored education and an agrarian democracy in the new Republic. His educational idea of creating specialized units of learning is physically expressed in the configuration of his campus plan, which he called the "Academical Village". Individual academic units are expressed visually as distinct structures, represented by Pavilions, facing a grassy quadrangle, with each Pavilion housing classroom, faculty office, and homes. Though unique, each is visually equal in importance, and they are linked with a series of open air arcades that are the front facades of student accommodations. Gardens and vegetable plots are placed behind and surrounded by serpentine walls, affirming the importance of the agrarian lifestyle.
His highly ordered site plan establishes an ensemble of buildings surrounding a central rectangular quadrangle, named The Lawn, which is lined on either side with the academic teaching units and their linking arcades. The quad is enclosed at one end with the library, the repository of knowledge, at the head of the table. The remaining side opposite the library remained open-ended for future growth. The lawn rises gradually as a series of stepped terraces, each a few feet higher than the last, rising up to the library set in the most prominent position at the top, while also suggesting that the Academical Village facilitates easier movement to the future.
Stylistically, Jefferson was a proponent of the Greek and Roman styles, which he believed to be most representative of American democracy by historical association. Each academic unit is designed with a two story temple front facing the quadrangle, while the library is modeled on the Roman Pantheon. The ensemble of buildings surrounding the quad is an unmistakable architectural statement of the importance of secular public education, while the exclusion of religious structures reinforces the principle of separation of church and state. The campus planning and architectural treatment remains today as a paradigm of building of structures to express intellectual ideas and aspirations. A survey of members of the American Institute of Architects identified Jefferson's campus as the most significant work of architecture in America.
The University was designed as the capstone of the educational system of Virginia. In his vision, any citizen of the state could attend school with the sole criterion being ability.
Death



Jefferson's gravesite[44]
Jefferson died on July 4, 1826, the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence. He died a few hours before John Adams, his compatriot in their quest for independence, then great political rival, and later friend and correspondent. Adams is often rumored to have referenced Jefferson in his last words, unaware of his passing.[45] Jefferson is considered to have died from a number of conditions in his old age: toxins in his blood and uremia from nephropathy, severe diarrhea, and pneumonia. Problems urinating from a urinary tract infection, while a symptom of kidney disease, have made some consider that Jefferson died from undiagnosed prostate cancer.[46][unreliable source?]
Although he was born into one of the wealthiest families in North America, Thomas Jefferson was deeply in debt when he died. Jefferson's trouble began when his father-in-law died, and he and his brothers-in-law quickly divided the estate before its debts were settled. It made each of them liable for the whole amount due – which turned out to be more than they expected.
Jefferson sold land before the American Revolution to pay off the debts, but by the time he received payment, the paper money was worthless amid the skyrocketing inflation of the war years. Cornwallis ravaged Jefferson's plantation during the war, and British creditors resumed their collection efforts when the conflict ended. Jefferson suffered another financial setback when he cosigned notes for a relative who reneged on debts in the financial Panic of 1819. Only Jefferson's public stature prevented creditors from seizing Monticello and selling it out from under him during his lifetime.
After his death, his possessions were sold at auction. In 1831, Jefferson's 552 acres (223 hectares) were sold to James T. Barclay for $7,000, equivalent to $144 thousand today.[47] Thomas Jefferson is buried on his Monticello estate, in Charlottesville, Virginia. In his will, he left Monticello to the United States to be used as a school for orphans of navy officers. His epitaph, written by him with an insistence that only his words and "not a word more" be inscribed (notably omitting his service as Governor of Virginia, Vice-President and President), reads:
"HERE WAS BURIED THOMAS JEFFERSON
AUTHOR OF THE DECLARATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE
OF THE STATUTE OF VIRGINIA FOR RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
AND FATHER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA."
Below the epitaph, on a separate panel, is written
BORN APRIL 2. 1743. O.S.
DIED JULY 4. 1826.
The initials O.S. are a notation for Old Style and that is a reference to the change of dating that occurred during Jefferson's lifetime from the Julian calendar to the Gregorian calendar under the British Calendar (New Style) Act 1750.[48]
Appearance and temperament

Jefferson was a thin, tall man, who stood at 6'2" 1/2 but was not particularly imposing; his eyes were small, his skin tone was pale.[49] Over the years Jefferson suffered from numerous ailments, in addition to frequent bouts of anxiety and psychological depression. Some of his known maladies include episodic headaches, dysentery, urinary tract obstruction, malaria, and diabetes.[50]
"The Sage of Monticello" cultivated an image that earned him the other nickname, "Man of the People." He affected a popular air by greeting White House guests in homespun attire like a robe and bedroom slippers, which European diplomats assumed was a deliberate insult.[51] Dolley Madison, wife of James Madison (Jefferson's secretary of state), and Jefferson's daughters relaxed White House protocol and turned formal state dinners into more casual and entertaining social events.[52]
Jefferson's writings were utilitarian and evidenced great intellect, and he had an affinity with languages. He learned Gaelic to translate Ossian, and sent to James Macpherson for the originals.[53]
As President, he discontinued the practice of delivering the State of the Union address in person, instead sending the address to Congress in writing (the practice was eventually revived by Woodrow Wilson); he gave only two public speeches during his Presidency. Jefferson had a lisp[54] and preferred writing to public speaking partly because of this. He burned all of his letters between himself and his wife at her death, creating the portrait of a man who at times could be very private. Indeed, he preferred working in the privacy of his office rather than in the public eye.[55]
Interests and activities



Jefferson's drawing of a pasta machine, ca. 1787
Jefferson was an accomplished architect who was extremely influential in bringing the Neo-Palladian style—popular among the Whig aristocracy of Britain—to the United States. The style was associated with Enlightenment ideas of republican civic virtue and political liberty. Jefferson designed his home Monticello near Charlottesville, Virginia. Nearby is the University of Virginia, the only university ever to have been founded by a U.S. president. Jefferson designed the architecture of the first buildings as well as the original curriculum and residential style. Monticello and the University of Virginia are together one of only four man-made World Heritage Sites in the United States of America.
Jefferson also designed Poplar Forest, near Lynchburg, in Bedford County, Virginia, as a private retreat from his very public life. Jefferson contributed to the design of the Virginia State Capitol, which was modeled after the Maison Carrée, an ancient Roman temple at Nîmes in southern France. Jefferson's buildings helped initiate the ensuing American fashion for Federal architecture.
Jefferson invented many small practical devices, such as a rotating book stand and (in collaboration with Charles Wilson Peale) a number of improvements to the polygraph, a device that made a copy of a letter as he wrote the original.[56] Monticello included automatic doors, the first swivel chair, and other convenient devices invented by Jefferson. His interest in mechanical drawing devices included the use of the physiognotrace. In 1802, Charles Willson Peale sent a watercolor sketch of this instrument to Thomas Jefferson,[57] along with a detailed explanation. The drawing now sits with the Jefferson Papers in the Library of Congress. In 1804, Charles Fevret de Saint-Memin created an oval silhouette likeness of Jefferson using the physiognotrace, which became one of the best known likenesses of Jefferson in his day.[58]
In 1780, he joined Benjamin Franklin's American Philosophical Society. He served as president of the society from 1797 to 1815.
Jefferson was interested in birds. His Notes on Virginia contains a list of the birds found in his home state, though there are "doubtless many others which have not yet been described and classed." He also comments that the drawings of Virginia birds by the English naturalist Mark Catesby "are better as to form and attitude, than colouring, which is generally too high."


Letter from Jefferson to General George Rogers Clark asking Clark to crate fossils he discovered at Big Bone Lick, Kentucky, for shipment to a New Orleans collector. The following year Jefferson offered the archaeological finds to the National Institute of Paris, France
Jefferson was an avid wine lover and collector, and a noted gourmet. During his years in France (1784–1789), he took extensive trips through French and other European wine regions, and bought wine to send back to the United States. He is noted for the bold pronouncement: "We could in the United States make as great a variety of wines as are made in Europe, not exactly of the same kinds, but doubtless as good." While there were extensive vineyards planted at Monticello, a significant portion were of the European wine grape Vitis vinifera and did not survive the many vine diseases native to the Americas.
In 1801, he published A Manual of Parliamentary Practice that is still in use. In 1812, Jefferson published a second edition.
After the British burned Washington, D.C. and the Library of Congress in August 1814, Jefferson offered his own collection of books to the nation. In January 1815, Congress accepted his offer, appropriating $23,950 for his 6,487 books. The foundation was laid for a great national library. Today, the Library of Congress' website for federal legislative information is named THOMAS, in honor of Jefferson.[59] In 2007, Jefferson's two-volume 1764 edition of the Qur'an was used by Rep. Keith Ellison for his swearing in to the House of Representatives.[60]
Political philosophy and views



In his May 28, 1818, letter to Mordecai Manuel Noah, Jefferson expressed his faith in humanity and his views on the nature of democracy.
Jefferson was a leader in developing republicanism in the United States. He insisted that the British aristocratic system was inherently corrupt and that Americans' devotion to civic virtue required independence. In the 1790s he repeatedly warned that Hamilton and Adams were trying to impose a British-like monarchical system that threatened republicanism. He supported the War of 1812, hoping it would drive away the British military and ideological threat from Canada.
Jefferson's vision for American virtue was that of an agricultural nation of yeoman farmers minding their own affairs. His agrarianism stood in contrast to the vision of Alexander Hamilton of a nation of commerce and manufacturing, which Jefferson said offered too many temptations to corruption. Jefferson's deep belief in the uniqueness and the potential of America made him the father of American exceptionalism. In particular, he was confident that an underpopulated America could avoid what he considered the horrors of class-divided, industrialized Europe.[citation needed]
Jefferson's republican political principles were heavily influenced by the Country Party of 18th century British opposition writers. He was influenced by John Locke (particularly relating to the principle of inalienable rights). Historians find few traces of any influence by his French contemporary, Jean-Jacques Rousseau.[61]
Francophilia
Jefferson was notorious for his love of France and French culture.[62][63] Even during the excesses of the Reign of Terror, Jefferson refused to disavow the revolution because he was "convinced that the fates of the two republics were indissolubly linked. To back away from France would be to undermine the cause of republicanism in America." [64] Commenting on the continuing revolutions in Holland and France, the retired Secretary of State predicted: "this ball of liberty, I believe most piously, is now so well in motion that it will roll round the globe, at least the enlightened part of it, for light & liberty go together. it is our glory that we first put it into motion."[65]
The "staunchly Francophile"[66] Jefferson, and by extension his adherents or "Jeffersonians", were characterized by his political enemies, the Federalists, as "decadent, ungodly and immoral Francophiles"[67]
Jefferson would often sign his letters "Affectionately adieu", and commented late in life "France, freed from that monster, Bonaparte, must again become the most agreeable country on earth."[68]
The 1995 film Jefferson in Paris by James Ivory, recalls this connection.
Banks and bankers
Jefferson distrusted all forms of banking, which he identified with speculation and chicanery. He opposed borrowing from banks because it created long-term debt as well as monopolies, and inclined the people to dangerous speculation, as opposed to productive labor on the farm. He felt that each generation should pay back its debt within 19 years, and not impose a long-term debt on subsequent generations. Jefferson fought against Hamilton's proposed Bank of the United States in 1790, but lost. Jefferson also opposed the bank loans that financed the War of 1812.[69] His fellow tobacco planters, however, recognized the need for banks in order to finance the purchase of new land and new slaves, and support commerce, industry and internal improvements.[70]
Jefferson often attacked banks, paper money and borrowing as inimical to Republicanism;[71] in retirement in 1816, he wrote John Taylor:
"The system of banking we have both equally and ever reprobated. I contemplate it as a blot left in all our constitutions, which, if not covered, will end in their destruction, which is already hit by the gamblers in corruption, and is sweeping away in its progress the fortunes and morals of our citizens."[72]
Individual rights
Jefferson believed that each individual has "certain inalienable rights". That is, these rights exist with or without government; man cannot create, take, or give them away. It is the right of "liberty" on which Jefferson is most notable for expounding. He defines it by saying, "Rightful liberty is unobstructed action according to our will within limits drawn around us by the equal rights of others. I do not add 'within the limits of the law,' because law is often but the tyrant's will, and always so when it violates the rights of the individual."[73] Hence, for Jefferson, though government cannot create a right to liberty, it can indeed violate it. The limit of an individual's rightful liberty is not what law says it is but is simply a matter of stopping short of prohibiting other individuals from having the same liberty. A proper government, for Jefferson, is one that not only prohibits individuals in society from infringing on the liberty of other individuals, but also restrains itself from diminishing individual liberty.
Jefferson's commitment to equality was expressed in his successful efforts to abolish primogeniture in Virginia, the rule by which the first born son inherited all the land.[74]
Jefferson believed that individuals have an innate sense of morality that prescribes right from wrong when dealing with other individuals—that whether they choose to restrain themselves or not, they have an innate sense of the natural rights of others. He even believed that moral sense to be reliable enough that an anarchist society could function well, provided that it was reasonably small. On several occasions, he expressed admiration for the tribal, communal way of living of Native Americans:[75] Jefferson is sometimes seen as a philosophical anarchist.[76]
He said in a letter to Colonel Carrington: "I am convinced that those societies (as the Indians) which live without government, enjoy in their general mass an infinitely greater degree of happiness than those who live under the European governments." However, Jefferson believed anarchism to be "inconsistent with any great degree of population".[77] Hence, he did advocate government for the American expanse provided that it exists by "consent of the governed".
In the Preamble to his original draft of the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson wrote:
We hold these truths to be sacred & undeniable; that all men are created equal & independent, that from that equal creation they derive rights inherent & inalienable, among which are the preservation of life, & liberty, & the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these ends, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed; that whenever any form of government shall become destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, & to institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles & organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety & happiness.[78]
Jefferson's dedication to "consent of the governed" was so thorough that he believed that individuals could not be morally bound by the actions of preceding generations. This included debts as well as law. He said that "no society can make a perpetual constitution or even a perpetual law. The earth belongs always to the living generation." He even calculated what he believed to be the proper cycle of legal revolution: "Every constitution then, and every law, naturally expires at the end of nineteen years. If it is to be enforced longer, it is an act of force, and not of right." He arrived at 19 years through calculations with expectancy of life tables, taking into account what he believed to be the age of "maturity"—when an individual is able to reason for himself.[79] He also advocated that the national debt be eliminated. He did not believe that living individuals had a moral obligation to repay the debts of previous generations. He said that repaying such debts was "a question of generosity and not of right."[80]
States' rights
Jefferson's very strong defense of States' rights, especially in the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions of 1798, set the tone for hostility to expansion of federal powers. However, some of his foreign policies did strengthen the government. Most important was the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, when he used the implied powers to annex a huge foreign territory and all its French and Indian inhabitants. The population was estimated to be 97,000 as of the 1810 census.[81] His enforcement of the Embargo Act of 1807, while it failed in terms of foreign policy, demonstrated that the federal government could intervene with great force at the local level in controlling trade that might lead to war.
Carrying of arms
Jefferson copied many excerpts from the various books he read into his "Legal Commonplace Book."[82] One passage he copied which touches on gun control was from Cesare Beccaria's Essay on Crimes and Punishments. The passage, which is written in Italian, discusses the "false idea of utility” (false idee di utilità) which Beccaria saw as underlying some laws. It can be translated, in part, as:
A principal source of errors and injustice are false ideas of utility. For example: that legislator has false ideas of utility ... who would deprive men of the use of fire for fear of their being burnt, and of water for fear of their being drowned; and who knows of no means of preventing evil but by destroying it.
The laws of this nature are those which forbid to wear arms, disarming those only who are not disposed to commit the crime which the laws mean to prevent. ... It certainly makes the situation of the assaulted worse, and of the assailants better, and rather encourages than prevents murder, as it requires less courage to attack unarmed than armed persons.[83]
Jefferson's only notation was, "False idee di utilità."[83] It isn't known whether Jefferson agreed with the example Beccaria used, or with the general idea, or if he had some other reason for copying the passage.
Corporations
Jefferson in 1816 wrote to George Logan,
In this respect England exhibits the most remarkable phenomenon in the universe in the contrast between the profligacy of it's government and the probity of it's citizens. And accordingly it is now exhibiting an example of the truth of the maxim that virtue & interest are inseparable. It ends, as might have been expected, in the ruin of it's people, but this ruin will fall heaviest, as it ought to fall on that hereditary aristocracy which has for generations been preparing the catastrophe. I hope we shall take warning from the example and crush in it's birth the aristocracy of our monied corporations which dare already to challenge our government to a trial of strength and bid defiance to the laws of our country.[84]
Judiciary
Trained as a lawyer, Jefferson was a gifted writer but never a good speaker or advocate and was never comfortable in court. He believed that judges should be technical specialists but should not set policy. He privately felt the 1803 Supreme Court ruling in Marbury v. Madison was a violation of democracy, for it made the Supreme Court the final decision-maker on the Constitution. He lacked enough support in Congress to propose a Constitutional amendment to overturn it.[85] Jefferson continued to oppose the doctrine of judicial review:
To consider the judges as the ultimate arbiters of all constitutional questions [is] a very dangerous doctrine indeed, and one which would place us under the despotism of an oligarchy. Our judges are as honest as other men and not more so. They have with others the same passions for party, for power, and the privilege of their corps. Their maxim is boni judicis est ampliare jurisdictionem [good justice is broad jurisdiction], and their power the more dangerous as they are in office for life and not responsible, as the other functionaries are, to the elective control. The Constitution has erected no such single tribunal, knowing that to whatever hands confided, with the corruptions of time and party, its members would become despots. It has more wisely made all the departments co-equal and co-sovereign within themselves.[86]
Rebellion to restrain government and retain individual rights
After the Revolutionary War, Jefferson advocated restraining government via rebellion and violence when necessary, in order to protect individual freedoms. In a letter to James Madison on January 30, 1787, Jefferson wrote, "A little rebellion, now and then, is a good thing, and as necessary in the political world as storms in the physical...It is a medicine necessary for the sound health of government."[87] Similarly, in a letter to Abigail Adams on February 22, 1787 he wrote, "The spirit of resistance to government is so valuable on certain occasions that I wish it to be always kept alive. It will often be exercised when wrong, but better so than not to be exercised at all."[87] Concerning Shays' Rebellion after he had heard of the bloodshed, on November 13, 1787 Jefferson wrote to William S. Smith, John Adams' son-in-law, "What signify a few lives lost in a century or two? The tree of liberty must from time to time be refreshed with the blood of patriots and tyrants. It is its natural manure."[88] In another letter to William S. Smith during 1787, Jefferson wrote: And what country can preserve its liberties, if the rulers are not warned from time to time, that this people preserve the spirit of resistance? Let them take arms.[87]
Self-esteem
In a letter to Francis Hopkinson of March 13, 1789, Jefferson wrote: "I never had an opinion in politics or religion which I was afraid to own. A costive reserve on these subjects might have procured me more esteem from some people, but less from myself."[89]
Women in politics
Jefferson disliked seeing women take political roles, Historian Richard Morris wrote, "Abigail Adams excepted, Jefferson detested intellectual women. Annoyed by the political chatter of women in Parisian salons, he wrote home expressing the hope that 'our good ladies ... are contented to soothe and calm the minds of their husbands returning ruffled from political debate.'" While President, Jefferson wrote that "The appointment of a woman to office is an innovation for which the public is not prepared, nor am I."[90]
Religion

Further information: Thomas Jefferson and religion
The religious views of Thomas Jefferson diverged from the orthodox Christianity of his day. Throughout his life Jefferson was intensely interested in theology, biblical study, and morality. He is most closely connected with the Episcopal Church, Unitarianism, and the religious philosophy of Deism. He wrote to a nephew, "Question with boldness even the existence of a God; because, if there be one, he must more approve of the homage of reason, than that of blind-folded fear."[91][92] In private letters, Jefferson refers to himself as "Christian" (1803),[93][94] "a sect by myself" (1819),[95] an "Epicurean" (1819),[96] a "Materialist" (1820),[97] and a "Unitarian by myself" (1825).[98]
Jefferson believed in the moral teachings of Christ; writing a bible of Christ's teachings without the miracles.[99] Jefferson, however, was firmly anticlerical saying that in "every country and every age, the priest has been hostile to liberty. He is always in alliance with the despot...they have perverted the purest religion ever preached to man into mystery and jargon, unintelligible to all mankind, and therefore the safer for their purposes."[100] Jefferson himself privately expressed doubts on the existance of invisible beings such as God, angels, and the soul writing, "To talk of immaterial existences is to talk of nothings."[101] Jefferson believed that Immaculate Conception by the Virgin Mary would eventually be "classed with the fable of the generation of Minerva in the brain of Jupiter." [102] Jefferson also rejected the predestination doctrine of John Calvin and the Book of Revelations in the Bible. [103]
Native American policy

Jefferson was the first President to propose the idea of a formal Indian Removal plan.[104][105]
Andrew Jackson is often erroneously credited with initiating Indian Removal, because Congress passed the Indian Removal Act in 1830, during his presidency, and also because of his personal involvement in the forceful removal of many Eastern tribes.[104] But Jackson was merely legalizing and implementing a plan laid out by Jefferson in a series of private letters that began in 1803 (for example, see letter to William Henry Harrison below).[104]
Jefferson's first promotions of Indian Removal were between 1776 and 1779, when he recommended forcing the Cherokee and Shawnee tribes to be driven out of their ancestral homelands to lands west of the Mississippi River.[104]
His first such act as president, was to make a deal with the state of Georgia that if Georgia were to release its legal claims to discovery in lands to the west, then the U.S. military would help forcefully expel the Cherokee people from Georgia. At the time, the Cherokee had a treaty with the United States government which guaranteed them the right to their lands, which was violated in Jefferson's deal with Georgia.[104]
Acculturation and assimilation
Jefferson's original plan was for Natives to give up their own cultures, religions, and lifestyles in favor of western European culture, Christian religion, and a sedentary agricultural lifestyle.[104][105]
Jefferson's expectation was that by assimilating them into an agricultural lifestyle and stripping them of self-sufficiency, they would become economically dependent on trade with white Americans, and would thereby be willing to give up land that they would otherwise not part with, in exchange for trade goods or to resolve unpaid debts.[106] In an 1803 letter to William Henry Harrison, Jefferson wrote:
To promote this disposition to exchange lands, which they have to spare and we want, for necessaries, which we have to spare and they want, we shall push our trading uses, and be glad to see the good and influential individuals among them run in debt, because we observe that when these debts get beyond what the individuals can pay, they become willing to lop them off by a cession of lands.... In this way our settlements will gradually circumscribe and approach the Indians, and they will in time either incorporate with us a citizens or the United States, or remove beyond the Mississippi. The former is certainly the termination of their history most happy for themselves; but, in the whole course of this, it is essential to cultivate their love. As to their fear, we presume that our strength and their weakness is now so visible that they must see we have only to shut our hand to crush them, and that all our liberalities to them proceed from motives of pure humanity only. Should any tribe be foolhardy enough to take up the hatchet at any time, the seizing the whole country of that tribe, and driving them across the Mississippi, as the only condition of peace, would be an example to others, and a furtherance of our final consolidation.[106]
War and removal west
Jefferson wanted to integrate Indians into American society, explaining put it in a letter to Alexander von Humboldt in 1813:
"You know, my friend, the benevolent plan we were pursuing here for the happiness of the aboriginal inhabitants in our vicinities. We spared nothing to keep them at peace with one another. To teach them agriculture and the rudiments of the most necessary arts, and to encourage industry by establishing among them separate property. In this way they would have been enabled to subsist and multiply on a moderate scale of landed possession. They would have mixed their blood with ours, and been amalgamated and identified with us within no distant period of time."[107]
However, where tribes formed a military coalition with the British in the years leading up to the War of 1812 and massacred American settlers, Jefferson argued that they should be forcefully removed from their land and sent west.[104] As Jefferson explained in the same 1813 letter to von Humboldt:
"On the commencement of our present war [the War of 1812], we pressed on them the observance of peace and neutrality, but the interested and unprincipled policy of England has defeated all our labors for the salvation of these unfortunate people. They have seduced the greater part of the tribes within our neighborhood, to take up the hatchet against us, and the cruel massacres they have committed on the women and children of our frontiers taken by surprise, will oblige us now to pursue them to extermination, or drive them to new seats beyond our reach."
Jefferson believed assimilation was best for Indians; if they rejected it then second best was removal to the west. The worst possible outcome would happen if Indians attacked the whites.[108] He told his Secretary of War, General Henry Dearborn (who was the primary government official responsible for Indian affairs): "if we are constrained to lift the hatchet against any tribe, we will never lay it down until that tribe is exterminated, or driven beyond the Mississipi."[109]
On slavery

Main article: Thomas Jefferson and slavery
Jefferson owned slaves all his life. Biographers point out that Jefferson was deeply in debt and had encumbered his slaves by notes and mortgages; he could not free them until he was free of debt, which never happened.[110] As a result, Jefferson seems to have suffered pangs and trials of conscience. His claimed ambivalence was also reflected in his treatment of those slaves who worked most closely with him and his family at Monticello and in other locations. He invested in having them trained and schooled in high quality skills.[111] He wrote about slavery, "We have the wolf by the ears; and we can neither hold him, nor safely let him go. Justice is in one scale, and self-preservation in the other."[112]


Jefferson in 1788 by John Trumbull
Jefferson, himself, was a white supremacist publishing his views that blacks were inferior to whites in his internationally acclaimed book, Notes on the State of Virginia. Supervising and owning hundreds of slaves, including their children, Jefferson believed that blacks were equal to lazy animals and were inferior to whites in reasoning, mathematical comprehension, and imagination. This was Jefferson's rationalization for their condition of slavery. In effect, Jefferson believed that the difference between blacks and whites was "fixed in nature", and was not dependent on their freedom or education. While Jefferson was a member of the Virginia legislature during the 1770s he authored racist legislation punishing freed blacks from living or moving into Virginia and punished interacial relations. Jefferson believed that freed blacks should be deported and replaced with white settlers. The forced deportation of blacks would prevent a race war between former slaves and whites, according to Jefferson.[113][114]
According to a biographer, Jefferson "believed that it was the responsibility of the state and society to free all slaves."[115] In his first draft of the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson condemned the British crown for sponsoring the importation of slavery to the colonies, charging that the crown "has waged cruel war against human nature itself, violating its most sacred rights of life and liberty in the persons of a distant people who never offended him, captivating & carrying them into slavery in another hemisphere." However, this language was dropped from the Declaration at the request of delegates from South Carolina and Georgia.
In 1778 the legislature passed a bill he proposed to ban further importation of slaves into Virginia, and he said it "stopped the increase of the evil by importation, leaving to future efforts its final eradication." Many slave owners opposed the slave trade, while supporting slavery. The two were distinct institutions.[116]
In 1807, as President, he signed a bill abolishing the slave trade. The slave trade was an embarrassment and other nations like Great Britain were doing the same, whilst maintaining slave plantations and slavery.
Jefferson seems to attack the institution of slavery in his Notes on the State of Virginia (1784):
There must doubtless be an unhappy influence on the manners of our people produced by the existence of slavery among us. The whole commerce between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most boisterous passions, the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and degrading submissions on the other.[117]
In this same work, Jefferson advanced his beliefs that black people were inferior to white people "in the endowments both of body and mind."[118] However, he also wrote in the same work that black people could have the right to live free in any country where people judge them by their nature, and not as just being good for labor.[119] He also wrote, "Nothing is more certainly written in the book of fate than that these people are to be free. [But] the two races...cannot live in the same government. Nature, habit, opinion has drawn indelible lines of distinction between them."[52] According to historian Stephen Ambrose: "Jefferson, like all slaveholders and many other white members of American society, regarded Negroes as inferior, childlike, untrustworthy and, of course, as property. Jefferson, the genius of politics, could see no way for African Americans to live in society as free people." At the same time he trusted them with his children, with preparation of his food and entertainment of high-ranking guests. So clearly he believed that some were trustworthy.[120] For a long-term solution Jefferson believed that slaves should be freed then deported peacefully to African colonies. Otherwise, he feared war and that in his words, "human nature must shudder at the prospect held up. We should in vain look for an example in the Spanish deportation or deletion of the Moors. This precedent would fall far short of our case."[121]
But on February 25, 1809, Jefferson repudiated his earlier view, writing in a letter to Abbé Grégoire:
Sir,—I have received the favor of your letter of August 17th, and with it the volume you were so kind to send me on the "Literature of Negroes." Be assured that no person living wishes more sincerely than I do, to see a complete refutation of the doubts I have myself entertained and expressed on the grade of understanding allotted to them by nature, and to find that in this respect they are on a par with ourselves. My doubts were the result of personal observation on the limited sphere of my own State, where the opportunity for the development of their genius were not favorable and those of exercising it still less so. I expressed them therefore with great hesitation; but whatever be their degree of talent it is no measure of their rights. Because Sir Isaac Newton was superior to others in understanding, he was not therefore lord of the person or property of others. On this subject they are gaining daily in the opinions of nations, and hopeful advances are making toward their re-establishment on an equal footing with the other colors of the human family. I pray you therefore to accept my thanks for the many instances you have enabled me to observe of respectable intelligence in that race of men, which cannot fail to have effect in hastening the day of their relief; and to be assured of the sentiments of high and just esteem and consideration which I tender to yourself with all sincerity.[122]
In August 1814 Edward Coles and Jefferson corresponded about Coles' ideas on emancipation: "Your solitary but welcome voice is the first which has brought this to my ear, and I have considered the general silence which prevails on this subject as indicating an apathy unfavorable to every hope.[123]
Jefferson emancipated two enslaved people during his lifetime, Robert Hemings in 1794 and James Hemings in 1796. He freed five additional enslaved men upon his death, including Madison and Eston Hemings, whom many historians now believe were the two youngest of his four children with Sally Hemings. They were all male, and all from the Hemings family.[124] One slave freed was Joe Fossett, but not his wife or their eight children; they were sold to different slave owners in the slave auction after Jefferson's death. Madison and Eston were not freed until they were 21.[125] Jefferson possibly allowed Beverley (a male) and Harriet Hemings to leave Monticello in 1822; they went on to live as white people. Jefferson also informally freed their cousin James Hemings in 1804.[126] Six months after Jefferson's death, 130 enslaved men, women, and children from Monticello were auctioned off to help pay the debts of Jefferson's estate.[127]
Jefferson on US postage

Since the middle 19th century when the United States Post Office first began using postage stamps Thomas Jefferson's portrait has been found engraved on the face of the various U.S. Postage issues that have honored him. The first U.S. postage stamp to honor Jefferson was issued in March 1856, (displayed above) nine years after the Post Office issued its first two stamps of Washington and Franklin in 1847. Before this time ink and hand-stamps, usually made of cork or wood, (hence the term 'stamp') were used to mark and confirm payment of postage. Almost as popular and famous as George Washington, Jefferson has appeared comparatively much less often on postage issues over the last 160+ years, and unlike Washington and Franklin, appears on just two commemorative issues. All other occurrences of Jefferson are found on regular issues. [128]
Thomas Jefferson on the Regular Issues


1870


1895


1903


1923
There are an above average number of postage stamps that honor Jefferson and are too numerous to include on this page. The additional examples can be viewed in another page.
Jefferson's role in US currency

Three years after the United States Constitution was enacted in 1789 the newly seated Congress once again took up discussion of the issue of coinage. Then on April 2, 1792, Congress approved an Act requiring coins to be minted bearing the words 'United States of America' and also "an impression emblematic of liberty, with an inscription of the word Liberty, and the year of the coinage...". This was the first major step in establishing the US coinage system.[129][130]
The US had its problems to deal with in order to get its currency into circulation, and established in the free market. Not only were there crude minting conditions to improve, there was little gold and silver bullion available at the time, as the US was in its infancy and still recovering from the costs of the revolution. Also the expected movement of new US coinage into the marketplace was greatly impaired by metals speculators who exported US gold and silver coins overseas. The metal imbalance situation got so out of hand that in 1804, President Thomas Jefferson ordered a suspension of gold $10.00 Eagle production. In 1806, Jefferson likewise halted silver dollar production. Not until 1836 did minting of silver dollars resume. For three decades, then, the basal United States coin was not even minted.[129]
In more modern times Jefferson's portrait appears on the U.S. $2 bill, nickel, and the $100 Series EE Savings Bond.
Thomas Jefferson was honored on a Presidential Dollar which released into circulation on August 16, 2007. The day before the coins were issued the U.S. Mint held an official release ceremony at the Jefferson Memorial in Washington, D.C.[131]
Jefferson on US Currency

Thomas Jefferson on Presidential Dollar


Jefferson portrayed on the United States two-dollar bill


The Jefferson Nickel 1938–2004


Jefferson's face in close profile, US nickel, 2005


Jefferson's face, US nickel, 2006–present

Reputation and memorials

Further information: List of places named for Thomas Jefferson
Reputation
Jefferson's reputation has many dimensions. There is no doubt that his ideals of republicanism are profoundly implanted in the system of American political values.[132][133] As the father of the Democratic-Republican Party, and the honorary father of the modern Democratic Party, he has been routinely hailed by politicians and partisans, for example at the annual Jefferson-Jackson Day celebration that Democrats hold. In the 1850s, the new Republican party held him in high esteem for the Declaration of Independence, but deplored his emphasis on states rights, which secessionists were employing to break up the Union. In the late 19th century, "Jeffersonian Democracy" was appropriated by the conservative Bourbon Democrats. During the Progressive Era of the early 20th century, Progressives pointed more often to the vigorous nation building of Hamilton, and derided Jefferson's opposition to a strong central government. During the New Deal era of the 1930s, Democrats especially honored him, and President Franklin D. Roosevelt took the lead in building his monument in Washington. Jefferson's reputation among the general public and in the school textbooks has generally been high.[134]
However, his reputation among scholars and historians has come in cycles, and in recent years has been at a low point. The primary reason is historians' disgust of his harsh treatment of Indians and, especially, his opposition to a biracial society and his low opinion of blacks even as he perhaps had an affair with one.[135][136]
While historians are not unanimous, Princeton scholar Sean Wilentz in 2010 identified a scholarly trend very much in Hamilton's favor:
In recent years, Hamilton and his reputation have decidedly gained the initiative among scholars who portray him as the visionary architect of the modern liberal capitalist economy and of a dynamic federal government headed by an energetic executive. Jefferson and his allies, by contrast, have come across as naïve, dreamy idealists. At best according to many historians, the Jeffersonians were reactionary utopians who resisted the onrush of capitalist modernity in hopes of turning America into a yeoman farmers' arcadia. At worst, they were proslavery racists who wish to rid the West of Indians, expand the empire of slavery, and keep political power in local hands -- all the better to expand the institution of slavery and protect slaveholders' rights to own human property.[137].
Memorials
Jefferson has been memorialized in many ways, including buildings, sculptures, and currency. The Jefferson Memorial was dedicated in Washington, D.C. on April 13, 1943, the 200th anniversary of Jefferson's birth. The interior of the memorial includes a 19-foot (6 m) statue of Jefferson and engravings of passages from his writings. Most prominent are the words which are inscribed around the monument near the roof: "I have sworn upon the altar of god eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man".[138]
His original tombstone, now a cenotaph, is located on the campus in the University of Missouri's Quadrangle.
A life mask of Jefferson was created by John Henri Isaac Browere in the 1820s.[139]
Jefferson, together with George Washington, Theodore Roosevelt and Abraham Lincoln, was chosen by sculptor Gutzon Borglum and approved by President Calvin Coolidge to be depicted in stone at the Mount Rushmore Memorial.[140]
Recent memorials to Jefferson include the commissioning of the NOAA ship Thomas Jefferson in Norfolk, Virginia on July 8, 2003, in commemoration of his establishment of a Survey of the Coast, the predecessor to NOAA's National Ocean Service; and the placement of a bronze monument in Jefferson Park, Chicago at the entrance to the Jefferson Park Transit Center along Milwaukee Avenue in 2005.

The Jefferson Memorial in Washington, D.C.


Jefferson on Mount Rushmore

Marriage and family

Acknowledged wife and children
In 1772, at age 29 Jefferson married the 23-year-old widow Martha Wayles Skelton. They had six children: Martha Jefferson Randolph (1772–1836), Jane Randolph (1774–1775), a stillborn or unnamed son (1777), Mary Jefferson Eppes (1778–1804), Lucy Elizabeth (1780–1781), and another Lucy Elizabeth (1782–1785). Martha died on September 6, 1782, after the birth of her last child. Jefferson never remarried.
Alleged mixed-race children
See also: Sally Hemings and Jefferson DNA data
Jefferson is alleged to have had a long-term, intimate relationship with one of his slaves, Sally Hemings. She was said to have been a half-sister to Jefferson's late wife, and to have been three fourths white. Sally Hemings had six children, four of whom survived to adulthood and were freed or allowed to escape by Jefferson. They were presumably seven-eighths white by ancestry.[141]
During the administration of President Jefferson allegations were initiated by former employee James T. Callender after being denied an appointment that Jefferson had fathered several children with Hemings after his wife's death. Late 20th-century DNA testing indicated that a male in Jefferson's paternal line was the father of at least one of Sally Hemings's children but do not specifically identify Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson commented on the matter in a private letter in 1816:[142]
I should have fancied myself half guilty had I condescended to put pen to paper in refutation of their falsehoods, or drawn to them respect by any notice from myself.
According to a letter written by the 19th-century biographer Henry Randall, Jefferson's oldest grandson, Thomas Jefferson Randolph, recounted to him what others close to the family had already disclosed, that Sally Hemings had been the mistress of Jefferson's nephew Peter Carr, and that "their connection ...was perfectly notorious at Monticello." Randall also wrote that "there was not the shadow of suspicion that Mr. Jefferson in this or any other instance had commerce with female slaves."[143] However, DNA testing has shown that Jefferson's Carr nephews did not father Sally Hemings' children.[144][145][146]
Ancestry
Main article: Ancestry of Thomas Jefferson
Writings

Memorandums taken on a journey from Paris into the southern parts of France and Northern Italy, in the year 1787
A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774)
Autobiography (1821)
Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (1775)
Notes on the State of Virginia (1781)
Jefferson Bible, or The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth
Manual of Parliamentary Practice for the Use of the Senate of the United States (1801)
See also

	Book:Presidents of the United States (1789–1860)
Books are collections of articles that can be downloaded or ordered in print.
Jeffersonian Democracy
Maria Cosway
Monticello Association
US Presidents on US postage stamps
Notes

^ "The Thomas Jefferson Papers Timeline: 1743 -1827". http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/collections/jefferson_papers/mtjtime1.html. Retrieved 2009-07-19.
^ a b The birth and death of Thomas Jefferson are given using the Gregorian calendar. However, he was born when Britain and her colonies still used the Julian calendar, so contemporary records (and his tombstone) record his birth as April 2, 1743. The provisions of the Calendar (New Style) Act 1750, implemented in 1752, altered the official British dating method to the Gregorian calendar with the start of the year on January 1 – see the article on Old Style and New Style dates for more details.
^ Robert W. Tucker, and David C. Hendrickson, Empire of Liberty: The Statecraft of Thomas Jefferson (1990)
^ Jefferson, Thomas (January 1, 1802). "Jefferson's Wall of Separation Letter". U.S. Constitution Online. http://www.usconstitution.net/jeffwall.html. Retrieved April 13, 2008.
^ April 29, 1962 dinner honoring 49 Nobel Laureates (Simpson's Contemporary Quotations, 1988, from Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, p. 347).
^ "Facts on Thomas Jefferson". Revolutionary-war-and-beyond.com. 1943-04-13. http://www.revolutionary-war-and-beyond.com/facts-on-thomas-jefferson.html. Retrieved 2010-02-04.
^ Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia – Welsh Ancestry. Retrieved June 2, 2010.
^ Henry Stephens Randall, The Life of Thomas Jefferson
^ Merrill D. Peterson, Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation: A Biography (Oxford UP, 1975) pp 7-9
^ Merrill D. Peterson, ed. Thomas Jefferson: Writings, p. 1236
^ Thomas Jefferson on Wine by John Hailman, 2006
^ Peterson, Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation: A Biography pp 9-12
^ a b c Henry Stephens Randall, The Life of Thomas Jefferson. p 41
^ a b Henry Stephens Randall, The Life of Thomas Jefferson. p 47
^ Scotts U.S. Stamp Catalogue
^ Thomas Jefferson p.214
^ TJ to John Minor August 30, 1814 Lipscomb and Bergh, WTJ 2:420-21
^ ArchitectureWeek. "The Orders – 01". http://www.architectureweek.com/topics/orders-01.html. Retrieved 2009-07-20.
^ "nMonticello". Plantationdb.monticello.org. http://plantationdb.monticello.org/. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ a b c Merrill D. Peterson, "Jefferson, Thomas"; American National Biography Online, February 2000.
^ Ellis, American Sphinx, 47–49.
^ Maier, American Scripture. Other standard works on Jefferson and the Declaration include Garry Wills, Inventing America: Jefferson's Declaration of Independence (1978) and Carl L. Becker, The Declaration of Independence: A Study in the History of Political Ideas (1922).
^ a b Ellis, American Sphinx, 50.
^ Peterson, Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation: A Biography p 146-49
^ Peterson, Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation: A Biography pp 125-29
^ Bennett, William J. (2006). "The Greatest Revolution". America: The Last Best Hope (Volume I): From the Age of Discovery to a World at War. Nelson Current. p. 99. ISBN 1-59555-055-0.
^ Ferling 2004, p. 26
^ Annette Gordon-Reed "Did Sally Hemings and Thomas Jefferson Love Each Other?," American Heritage, Fall 2008.
^ Annette Gordon-Reed, The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family, New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2008
^ The Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States of America. Books.google.com. 1833. http://books.google.com/?id=dmgUAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA218&lpg=PA218&dq=Thulemeier+Magdeburg. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ Ferling 2004, p. 59
^ Stanley Elkins and Eric McKitrick, The Age of Federalism (1995), p 344.
^ "Foreign Affairs," in Peterson, ed. Thomas Jefferson: A Reference Encyclopedia (1986) p 325
^ Schachner 1951, p. 495
^ Miller (1960), 143–4, 148–9.
^ An American History Lesson For Pat Buchana, Kenneth C. Davis, Huffington Post, July 18, 2009.
^ a b Thomas Jefferson, the 'Negro President', Gary Willis on The Tavis Smiley Show, February 16, 2004.
^ Negro President: Jefferson and the Slave Power[dead link], Review of Garry Willis's book on WNYC, February 16, 2004.
^ "Table 1.1 Acquisition of the Public Domain 1781–1867" (PDF). http://www.blm.gov/natacq/pls02/pls1-1_02.pdf. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ [John Hope Franklin, Race and History: Selected Essays 1938–1988 (Louisiana State University Press: 1989) p. 336] and [John Hope Franklin, Racial Equality in America (Chicago: 1976), p. 24-26]
^ Martin Kelly. "Thomas Jefferson Biography – Third President of the United States". http://americanhistory.about.com/od/thomasjefferson/p/pjefferson.htm. Retrieved 2009-07-05.
^ Robert MacNamara. "Importation of Slaves Outlawed by 1807 Act of Congress". http://history1800s.about.com/od/slaveryinamerica/a/1807slaveact.htm. Retrieved 2009-07-05.
^ "Jefferson on Politics & Government: Publicly Supported Education". Etext.lib.virginia.edu. http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/jefferson/quotations/jeff1370.htm. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ Thomas Jefferson at Find a Grave
^ Jefferson Still Survives. Retrieved on 2006-12-26.
^ wiki.monticello.org Jefferson's Cause of Death. Retrieved 2010-06-12.
^ Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–2008. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Retrieved December 7, 2010.
^ "Monticello Report: The Calendar and Old Style (O. S.)". Thomas Jefferson Foundation (Monticello.org). 2007. Archived from the original on 2007-08-15. http://web.archive.org/web/20070815182623/http://www.monticello.org/reports/life/old_style.html. Retrieved 2007-09-15.
^ Andrew Burstein and Nancy Isenberg, Madison and Jefferson (2010) p. xvi
^ Norman G. Schneeberg, "The Medical History of Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826)," Journal of Medical Biography, May 2008, Vol. 16 Issue 2, pp 118-125
^ Burstein and Isenberg, Madison and Jefferson (2010) p. 401
^ a b "'Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826)' at the University of Virginia". Americanpresident.org. http://www.americanpresident.org/history/thomasjefferson/biography/FamilyLife.common.shtml. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ Kevin J. Hayes, The road to Monticello: the life and mind of Thomas Jefferson (Oxford U.P., 2008) pp 135-6
^ "Thomas Jefferson: Silent Member". http://www.awesomestories.com/biography/thomas_jefferson/thomas_jefferson_ch1.htm. Retrieved 2007-07-23.
^ "'American Sphinx' by Joseph J. Ellis at". Futurecasts.com. http://www.futurecasts.com/Ellis,%20Jefferson,%20American%20Sphinx.htm. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ "Jefferson's Inventions". Cti.itc.virginia.edu. http://cti.itc.virginia.edu/~meg3c/classes/tcc313/200Rprojs/jefferson_invent/invent.html. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ Physiognotrace
^ "The Jefferson Encyclopedia". Wiki.monticello.org. 2009-12-18. http://wiki.monticello.org/mediawiki/index.php/Jefferson_Oval_Portrait_by_Memin_(Physiognotrace). Retrieved 2010-04-23.
^ Ellis, Joseph J. (1994). "American Sphinx: The Contradictions of Thomas Jefferson". Library of Congress. http://thomas.loc.gov/.
^ Amy Argetsinger and Roxanne Roberts (January 1, 2007). "But It's Thomas Jefferson's Koran!". Washington Post: p. C03. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/03/AR2007010300075.html. Retrieved January 3, 2007.
^ J. G. A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition (1975), 533; see also Richard K. Matthews, The Radical Politics of Thomas Jefferson, (1986), p. 17, 139n.16.
^ Lawrence S. Kaplan, "Jefferson and France: An Essay on Politics and Political Ideas", Yale University Press, 1980
^ Ronald R. Schuckel "The origins of Thomas Jefferson as a Francophile, 1784-1789", Butler University, 1965.
^ Thomas Jefferson, Jean M. Yarbrough, The essential Jefferson, Hackett Publishing, 2006. (p. xx)
^ Thomas Jefferson, Paul Leicester Ford, "The Writings of Thomas Jefferson: 1795-1801", G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1896. (p. 22)
^ Eugene Victor Rostow, "A breakfast for Bonaparte: U.S. national security interests from the Heights of Abraham to the nuclear age" DIANE Publishing, 1992. (p. 116)
^ W. M. Verhoeven, Beth Dolan Kautz, Revolutions and Watersheds: Transatlantic Dialogues, 1775-1815 (p. 80)
^ Thomas Jefferson, Henry Augustine Washington "The writings of Thomas Jefferson", Taylor & Maury, 1854. (p. 402)
^ Donald F. Swanson, "Bank-Notes Will Be But as Oak Leaves": Thomas Jefferson on Paper Money," Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, 1993, Vol. 101 Issue 1, pp 37-52
^ A. Glenn Crothers, "Banks and economic development in post-revolutionary Northern Virginia, 1790-1812," Business History Review, Spring 1999, Vol. 73 Issue 1, pp 1-39
^ Merrill Peterson, Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation (1975) pp 435-36; 700-701
^ Thomas Jefferson, Political writings (1999) ed. by Joyce Appleby and Terence Ball, p. 206-7
^ Letter to Isaac H. Tiffany, April 4, 1819 in Appleby and Ball (1999) p 224.
^ Brown 1954, pp. 51–52
^ "Notes on Virginia". Etext.lib.virginia.edu. http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/toc/modeng/public/JefVirg.html. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ Adler, Mortimer Jerome (2000). The Great Ideas. Open Court Publishing. p. 378.
^ Letter to James Madison, January 30, 1787
^ "Professor Julian Boyd's reconstruction of Jefferson's "original Rough draft" of the Declaration of Independence". Loc.gov. 2005-07-06. http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/declara/ruffdrft.html. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ Letter to James Madison, September 6, 1789
^ Letter to James Madison, September 6, 1789; Daniel Scott Smith, "Population and Political Ethics: Thomas Jefferson's Demography of Generations," The William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd Ser., Vol. 56, No. 3 (Jul., 1999), pp. 591–612 in jstor
^ [1][dead link]
^ "The Thomas Jefferson Papers". Library of Congress. http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/collections/jefferson_papers/mtjser5.html. Retrieved 2010-05-05.
^ a b "Laws that forbid the carrying of arms...(Quotation)". Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia. http://wiki.monticello.org/mediawiki/index.php/Laws_that_forbid_the_carrying_of_arms...(Quotation). Retrieved 2010-05-05.
^ Ford, ed, Paul Lester (1899). The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Vol X, 1816–1826. New York, London: G. P. Putnam's Sons. http://www.archive.org/stream/writingsofthomas10jeffiala/writingsofthomas10jeffiala_djvu.txt.
^ Peterson, Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation p. 699
^ Letter to William C. Jarvis, 1820
^ a b c Melton, The Quotable Founding Fathers, 277.
^ Letter to William Smith, November 13, 1787
^ "Encyclopædia Britannica's Guide to American Presidents". Britannica.com. http://www.britannica.com/presidents/article-9116912. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ Richard B. Morris, Seven Who Shaped Our Destiny (1973), p. 133
^ Jefferson to Peter Carr, Aug. 10, 1787
^ Charles Sanford, The Religious Life of Thomas Jefferson (1987).
^ Albert Ellery Bergh, ed (1853). April 21, 1803 letter to Doctor Benjamin Rush. X. The Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association. p. 379. http://www.constitution.org/tj/jeff10.txt. Retrieved 2009-05-23. "... To the corruptions of Christianity I am, indeed, opposed; but not to the genuine precepts of Jesus himself. I am a Christian, in the only sense in which he wished any one to be; sincerely attached to his doctrines, in preference to all others; ascribing to himself every human excellence; and believing he never claimed any other.... And in confiding it [an enclosed syllabus] to you, I know it will not be exposed to the malignant perversions of those who make every word from me a text for new misrepresentations and calumnies. I am moreover averse to the communication of my religious tenets to the public; because it would countenance the presumption of those who have endeavored to draw them before that tribunal, and to seduce public opinion to erect itself into that inquisition over the rights of conscience, which the laws have so justly proscribed...."
^ "Syllabus of an estimate of the merit of the doctrines ofJesus, compared with those of others". http://www.angelfire.com/co/JeffersonBible/jeffbsyl.html. Retrieved 2009-05-24.
^ Albert Ellery Bergh, ed (1853). June 25, 1819 letter to Ezra Stiles Ely. XV. The Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association. p. 202. http://www.constitution.org/tj/jeff15.txt. Retrieved 2009-05-23. "You say you are a Calvinist. I am not. I am of a sect by myself, as far as I know."
^ Albert Ellery Bergh, ed (1853). October 31, 1819 letter to William Short. XV. The Thomas Jefferson Memorial Association. p. 219. http://www.constitution.org/tj/jeff15.txt. Retrieved 2009-05-23. "As you say of yourself, I too am an Epicurian. I consider the genuine (not the imputed) doctrines of Epicurus as containing everything rational in moral philosophy which Greece and Rome have left us."
^ "Letter to William Short". April 13, 1820. http://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?ammem/mtj:@field(DOCID+@lit(ws03101)).
^ Thomas Jefferson (January 8, 1825). "letter to Dr. Benjamin Waterhouse". http://ead.lib.virginia.edu/vivaead/published/uva-sc/viu01679.document. The copy of this 1825 Thomas Jefferson letter to Benjamin Waterhouse (1754-1846) is in an unknown hand.
^ "The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth". 1820. http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/toc/modeng/public/JefJesu.html. Retrieved 12-08-2010.
^ Letter to Horatio Spafford (1814); Seldes (1983), The Great Quotations, p. 371.
^ Letter to John Adams (August 15, 1820)
^ Letter to John Adams (April 11, 1823)
^ Works of Thomas Jefferson, Vol. IV, p. 363; Jefferson, Thomas (1854). H. A. WASHINGTON. ed. The Writings of Thomas Jefferson: Being His Autobiography, Correspondence. WASHINGTON, D. C: TAYLOR & MATJRY. pp. 395. http://books.google.com/?id=1mIFAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA395&lpg=PA395&dq=no+more+worthy+nor+capable+of+explanation+than+the+incoherences+of+our+own+nightly+dreams. Retrieved 2010-12-08.
^ a b c d e f g Miller, Robert (July 1, 2008). Native America, Discovered and Conquered: : Thomas Jefferson, Lewis & Clark, and Manifest Destiny. Bison Books. p. 90. ISBN 978-0803215986 -- This reference is generic and lacks page numbers. Did writer actually read the book?.
^ a b Drinnon, Richard (March 1997). Facing West: The Metaphysics of Indian-Hating and Empire-Building. University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0806129280.
^ a b Jefferson, Thomas (1803). "President Thomas Jefferson to William Henry Harrison, Governor of the Indiana Territory,". http://courses.missouristate.edu/ftmiller/Documents/jeffindianpolicy.htm. Retrieved 2009-03-12.
^ "Letter From Thomas Jefferson to Alexander von Humboldt December 6, 1813". http://www.let.rug.nl/usa/P/tj3/writings/brf/jefl224.htm. Retrieved 2009-03-12.
^ Bernard W. Sheehan, Seeds of extinction: Jeffersonian philanthropy and the American Indian‎ (1974) pp 120–21
^ James P. Ronda, Thomas Jefferson and the changing West: from conquest to conservation (1997) p. 10; text in Moore, MariJo (2006). Eating Fire, Tasting Blood: An Anthology of the American Indian Holocaust. Running Press. ISBN 978-1560258384. http://books.google.com/?id=3oNPH4-ovFcC&pg=PA208&lpg=PA208&dq=Thomas+Jefferson+dearborn+hatchet.
^ Herbert E. Sloan, Principle and Interest: Thomas Jefferson and the Problem of Debt (2001) pp. 14–26, 220–1.
^ Hitchens 2005, p. 48
^ Miller, John Chester (1977). The Wolf by the Ears: Thomas Jefferson and Slavery. New York: Free Press, p. 241. The letter, dated April 22, 1820, was written to former Senator John Holmes of Maine.
^ John Ferling, Setting the World Ablaze, pg 290, Oxford University Press, 2000.
^ Greg Warnusz (Summer, 1990). "This Execrable Commerce – Thomas Jefferson and Slavery". http://www.lectorprep.org/jefferson_and_slavery.html. Retrieved 2009-08-18.
^ "Willard Sterne Randall, Thomas Jefferson: A Life. p 593.
^ [Ordinance of 1787] Lalor Cyclopædia of Political Science
^ Notes on the State of Virginia, Ch 18.
^ Notes on the State of Virginia Query 14
^ "Jefferson, Thomas, 1743–1826.". http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/etcbin/toccer-new2?id=JefVirg.sgm&images=images/modeng&data=/texts/english/modeng/parsed&tag=public&part=18&division=div1.
^ Flawed Founders by Stephen E. Ambrose.
^ Hitchens 2005, pp. 34–35
^ Letter of February 25, 1809 from Thomas Jefferson to French author Monsieur Gregoire, from The Writings of Thomas Jefferson (H. A. Worthington, ed.), Volume V, p. 429. Citation and quote from Morris Kominsky, The Hoaxers, pp. 110–111.
^ Twilight at Monticello, Crawford, 2008, Ch 17, p.101
^ Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy, Annette Gordon-Reed, pp. 38-43 (Univ. of Virginia Press, 1997)
^ "Last Will and Testament". March 17, 1826. http://www.monticello.org/site/research-and-collections/last-will-and-testament. Retrieved 2010-11-15.
^ "The Hemingses of Monticello", Annette Gordon-Reed, 489-503, 581-583 (WW Norton, 2008)
^ Lucia Stanton, Free Some Day: The African American Families of Monticello, (Thomas Jefferson Foundation, 2000), p. 141.
^ Scott Stamp Catalog, Index of Commemorative Stamps
^ a b "US Coin Values". Us-coin-values-advisor.com. http://www.us-coin-values-advisor.com/the-first-US-mint.html. Retrieved 2010-11-07.
^ The U.S. Mint and Coinage: An Illustrated History from 1776 to the Present, 1983 by Don. Taxay
^ "New York Times/ABOUT.COM". Coins.about.com. 2007-08-16. http://coins.about.com/od/presidentialdollars/a/jeffersondollar.htm. Retrieved 2010-11-07.
^ Joyce Appleby, Thomas Jefferson (2003) p. 134
^ Gary Hart, Restoration of the Republic: The Jeffersonian Ideal in 21st-Century America (2004) pp 13-17
^ Merrill D. Peterson, The Jefferson Image in the American Mind (1960), passim.
^ Appleby, Thomas Jefferson (2003) pp. 118, 134-43
^ Jeffrey L. Pasley, "Politics and the Misadventures of Thomas Jefferson's Modern Reputation: a Review Essay." Journal of Southern History 2006 72(4): 871–908.
^ Sean Wilentz, "Book Reviews," Journal of American History Sept. 2010 v. 97# 2 p 476. Wilentz notes that Wood (2009) is quite favorable toward Jefferson.
^ Office of the Historic American Buildings Survey/Historic American Engineering Record (HABS/HAER), of the National Park Service, Library of Congress (September 1994). "Documentation of the Jefferson Memorial". http://memory.loc.gov/pnp/habshaer/dc/dc0400/dc0473/sheet/00001a.tif. Retrieved 2009-09-04.
^ Charles Henry Hart. Browere's life masks of great Americans. Printed at the De Vinne Press for Doubleday and McClure Company, 1899. Google books
^ National Park Service. "Carving History". Mount Rushmore National Memorial. http://www.nps.gov/archive/moru/park_history/carving_hist/carving_history.htm. Retrieved 2009-09-04.
^ "''John Wayles Paternity''". Wiki.monticello.org. 2009-05-19. http://wiki.monticello.org/mediawiki/index.php/John_Wayles. Retrieved 2009-09-02.
^ [2][dead link]
^ The Real Thomas Jefferson by Allison, Andrew, K.DeLynn Cook, M. Richard Maxfield, W. Cleon Skousen p.232-233 National Center for Constitutional Studies, Washington, D.C.
^ Foster, EA; Jobling MA, Taylor PG, Donnelly P, de Knijff P, Mieremet R, Zerjal T, Tyler-Smith C (1998). "Jefferson fathered slave’s last child". Nature 396 (6706): 27–28. doi:10.1038/23835. PMID 9817200. http://www.familytreedna.com/pdf/Jeffersons.pdf.
^ Lander, ES; Ellis JJ (1998). "Founding father". Nature 396 (6706): 13–14. doi:10.1038/23802. PMID 9817195.
^ Foster et al., DM; Jobling, M. A.; Taylor, P. G.; Donnelly, P.; De Knijff, P.; Mieremet, R.; Zerjal, T.; Tyler-Smith, C. (1999). "Letters to the editor: the Thomas Jefferson paternity case". Nature 397 (6714): 32. doi:10.1038/16177. PMID 9892350.
Bibliography

Biographies
Appleby, Joyce. Thomas Jefferson (2003), short interpretive essay by leading scholar.
Bernstein, R. B. Thomas Jefferson. (2003) Well regarded short biography.
Burstein, Andrew. Jefferson's Secrets: Death and Desire at Monticello. (2005).
Cunningham, Noble E. In Pursuit of Reason (1988) well-reviewed short biography.
Crawford, Alan Pell, Twilight at Monticello, Random House, New York, (2008)
Ellis, Joseph. "American Sphinx: The Contradictions of Thomas Jefferson". http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/collections/jefferson_papers/mtjessay1.html.
Ellis, Joseph. American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson (1996). Prize winning essays; assumes prior reading of a biography.
Hitchens, Christopher (2005). Thomas Jefferson: Author of America, short biography.
Malone, Dumas. Jefferson and His Time, 6 vols. (1948–82). Multi-volume biography of TJ by leading expert; A short version is online[dead link].
Onuf, Peter. "The Scholars' Jefferson," William and Mary Quarterly 3d Series, L:4 (October 1993), 671–699. Historiographical review or scholarship about TJ; online through JSTOR at most academic libraries.
Padover, Saul K. Jefferson: A Great American's Life and Ideas
Peterson, Merrill D. (1975). Thomas Jefferson and the New Nation. A standard scholarly biography.
Peterson, Merrill D. (ed.) Thomas Jefferson: A Reference Biography (1986), 24 essays by leading scholars on aspects of Jefferson's career.
Randall, Henry Stephens (1858). The Life of Thomas Jefferson (volume 1 ed.).
Schachner, Nathan (1951). Thomas Jefferson: A Biography. 2 volumes.
Salgo, Sandor (1997). Thomas Jefferson: Musician and Violinist. Abook detailing Thomas Jefferson's love of music.
Politics and ideas
Ackerman, Bruce. The Failure of the Founding Fathers: Jefferson, Marshall, and the Rise of Presidential Democracy. (2005)
Adams, Henry. History of the United States of America during the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson (1889; Library of America edition 1986) famous 4-volume history
Wills, Garry, Henry Adams and the Making of America (2005), detailed analysis of Adams' History
Banning, Lance. The Jeffersonian Persuasion: Evolution of a Party Ideology (1978)
Brown, Stuart Gerry (1954). The First Republicans: Political Philosophy and Public Policy in the Party of Jefferson and Madison.
Channing; Edward. The Jeffersonian System: 1801–1811 (1906), "American Nation" survey of political history
Dunn, Susan. Jefferson's Second Revolution: The Election Crisis of 1800 and the Triumph of Republicanism (2004)
Elkins, Stanley and Eric McKitrick. The Age of Federalism (1995) in-depth coverage of politics of 1790s
Fatovic, Clement. "Constitutionalism and Presidential Prerogative: Jeffersonian and Hamiltonian Perspectives." : American Journal of Political Science, 2004 48(3): 429–444. Issn: 0092-5853 Fulltext: in Swetswise, Ingenta, Jstor, and Ebsco
Ferling, John (2004). Adams vs. Jefferson: The Tumultuous Election of 1800.
Finkelman, Paul. Slavery and the Founders: Race and Liberty in the Age of Jefferson (2001), esp ch 6–7
Hatzenbuehler, Ronald L. "I Tremble for My Country": Thomas Jefferson and the Virginia Gentry, (University Press of Florida; 206 pages; 2007). Argues that the TJ's critique of his fellow gentry in Virginia masked his own reluctance to change
Hitchens, Christopher (2005). Author of America: Thomas Jefferson. HarperCollins.
Horn, James P. P. Jan Ellen Lewis, and Peter S. Onuf, eds. The Revolution of 1800: Democracy, Race, and the New Republic (2002) 17 essays by scholars
Jayne, Allen. Jefferson's Declaration of Independence: Origins, Philosophy and Theology (2000); traces TJ's sources and emphasizes his incorporation of Deist theology into the Declaration.
Roger G. Kennedy. Mr. Jefferson's Lost Cause: Land, Farmers, Slavery, and the Louisiana Purchase (2003).
Knudson, Jerry W. Jefferson and the Press: Crucible of Liberty. (2006)
Lewis, Jan Ellen, and Onuf, Peter S., eds. Sally Hemings and Thomas Jefferson: History, Memory, Civic Culture. (1999)
McDonald, Forrest. The Presidency of Thomas Jefferson (1987) intellectual history approach to Jefferson's Presidency
Matthews, Richard K. "The Radical Political Philosophy of Thomas Jefferson: An Essay in Retrieval," Midwest Studies in Philosophy, XXVIII (2004)
Mayer, David N. The Constitutional Thought of Thomas Jefferson (2000)
Onuf, Peter S. Jefferson's Empire: The Languages of American Nationhood. (2000). Online review
Onuf, Peter. "Thomas Jefferson, Federalist" (1993) online journal essay
Rahe, Paul A. "Thomas Jefferson's Machiavellian Political Science". Review of Politics 1995 57(3): 449–481. ISSN 0034–6705 Fulltext online at Jstor and Ebsco.
Sears, Louis Martin. Jefferson and the Embargo (1927), state by state impact
Sloan, Herbert J. Principle and Interest: Thomas Jefferson and the Problem of Debt (1995). Shows the burden of debt in Jefferson's personal finances and political thought.
Smelser, Marshall. The Democratic Republic: 1801–1815 (1968). "New American Nation" survey of political and diplomatic history
Staloff, Darren. Hamilton, Adams, Jefferson: The Politics of Enlightenment and the American Founding. (2005)
Tucker, Robert W. and David C. Hendrickson. Empire of Liberty: The Statecraft of Thomas Jefferson (1992), foreign policy
Urofsky, Melvin I. "Thomas Jefferson and John Marshall: What Kind of Constitution Shall We Have?" Journal of Supreme Court History 2006 31(2): 109–125. Issn: 1059-4329 Fulltext: in Swetswise, Ingenta and Ebsco
Valsania, Maurizio. "'Our Original Barbarism': Man Vs. Nature in Thomas Jefferson's Moral Experience." Journal of the History of Ideas 2004 65(4): 627–645. Issn: 0022-5037 Fulltext: in Project Muse and Swetswise
Wagoner, Jennings L., Jr. Jefferson and Education. (2004).
Religion
Gaustad, Edwin S. Sworn on the Altar of God: A Religious Biography of Thomas Jefferson (2001) Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, ISBN 0-8028-0156-0
Sanford, Charles B. The Religious Life of Thomas Jefferson (1987) University of Virginia Press, ISBN 0-8139-1131-1
Sheridan, Eugene R. Jefferson and Religion, preface by Martin Marty, (2001) University of North Carolina Press, ISBN 1-882886-08-9
Edited by Jackson, Henry E., President, College for Social Engineers, Washington, D. C. "The Thomas Jefferson Bible" (1923) Copyright Boni and Liveright, Inc. Printed in the United States of America. Arranged by Thomas Jefferson. Translated by R. F. Weymouth. Located in the National Museum, Washington, D. C.
Legacy and historiography
Cogliano, Francis D. Thomas Jefferson: Reputation and Legacy (Edinburgh University Press, 2006) online edition
Onuf, Peter S., ed. Jeffersonian Legacies. (1993)
Perry, Barbara A. "Jefferson's Legacy to the Supreme Court: Freedom of Religion." Journal of Supreme Court History 2006 31(2): 181–198. Issn: 1059-4329 Fulltext in Swetswise, Ingenta and Ebsco
Pasley, Jeffrey L. "Politics and the Misadventures of Thomas Jefferson's Modern Reputation: a Review Essay." Journal of Southern History 2006 72(4): 871–908. Issn: 0022-4642 Fulltext in Ebsco.
Peterson, Merrill D. The Jefferson Image in the American Mind (1960), how Americans interpreted and remembered Jefferson
Taylor, Jeff. Where Did the Party Go?: William Jennings Bryan, Hubert Humphrey, and the Jeffersonian Legacy (2006), on Jefferson's role in Democratic history and ideology.
Wiltse, Charles Maurice. The Jeffersonian Tradition in American Democracy (1935), analysis of Jefferson's political philosophy
PBS interviews with 24 historians
Primary sources
Thomas Jefferson: Writings: Autobiography / Notes on the State of Virginia / Public and Private Papers / Addresses / Letters (1984, ISBN 978-0-940450-16-5) Library of America edition. There are numerous one-volume collections; this is perhaps the best place to start.
Thomas Jefferson, Political Writings ed by Joyce Appleby and Terence Ball. Cambridge University Press. 1999 online
Lipscomb, Andrew A. and Albert Ellery Bergh, eds. The Writings Of Thomas Jefferson 19 vol. (1907) not as complete nor as accurate as Boyd edition, but covers TJ from birth to death. It is out of copyright, and so is online free.
Edwin Morris Betts (editor), Thomas Jefferson's Farm Book, (Thomas Jefferson Memorial: December 1, 1953) ISBN 1-882886-10-0. Letters, notes, and drawings—a journal of plantation management recording his contributions to scientific agriculture, including an experimental farm implementing innovations such as horizontal plowing and crop-rotation, and Jefferson's own moldboard plow. It is a window to slave life, with data on food rations, daily work tasks, and slaves' clothing. The book portrays the industries pursued by enslaved and free workmen, including in the blacksmith's shop and spinning and weaving house.
Boyd, Julian P. et al., eds. The Papers of Thomas Jefferson. The definitive multivolume edition; available at major academic libraries. 31 volumes covers TJ to 1800, with 1801 due out in 2006.
The Jefferson Cyclopedia (1900) large collection of TJ quotations arranged by 9000 topics; searchable; copyright has expired and it is online free.
The Thomas Jefferson Papers, 1606–1827, 27,000 original manuscript documents at the Library of Congress online collection
Jefferson, Thomas. Notes on the State of Virginia (1787), London: Stockdale. This was Jefferson's only book
Shuffelton, Frank, ed., (1998) Penguin Classics paperback: ISBN 0-14-043667-7
Waldstreicher, David, ed., (2002) Palgrave Macmillan hardcover: ISBN 0-312-29428-X
online edition
Cappon, Lester J., ed. The Adams-Jefferson Letters (1959)
Howell, Wilbur Samuel, ed. Jefferson's Parliamentary Writings (1988). Jefferson's Manual of Parliamentary Practice, written when he was vice-President, with other relevant papers
Melton, Buckner F.: The Quotable Founding Fathers, Potomac Books, Washington D.C. (2004).
Smith, James Morton, ed. The Republic of Letters: The Correspondence between Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, 1776–1826, 3 vols. (1995)
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (Eleventh ed.). Cambridge University Press.
External links

Listen to this article (3 parts) · (info)
Part 1 • Part 2 • Part 3

This audio file was created from a revision of Thomas Jefferson dated 2008-09-02, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles
Find more about Thomas Jefferson on Wikipedia's sister projects:
	Definitions from Wiktionary
	Images and media from Commons
	Learning resources from Wikiversity
	News stories from Wikinews
	Quotations from Wikiquote
	Source texts from Wikisource
	Textbooks from Wikibooks
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson – Digital Edition
University of Virginia Jefferson Papers
B. L. Rayner's 1829 Life of Thomas Jefferson, an on-line etext
"The Hobby of My Old Age": Jefferson's University of Virginia
Quotations from Jefferson
University of Virginia biography
Biography on White House website
A collection of photographs of Thomas Jefferson's architecture
Library of Congress
Library of Congress: Jefferson exhibition
Library of Congress: Jefferson timeline
Thomas Jefferson: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
Massachusetts Historical Society
Thomas Jefferson Papers: An Electronic Archive This digital collection of Thomas Jefferson manuscripts held by the Massachusetts Historical Society includes the page images and transcriptions of Jefferson's Farm Book and Garden Book, also page images of Jefferson's library catalogs and architectural drawings.
National Park Service
Thomas Jefferson's Plan for the University of Virginia: Lessons from the Lawn, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
Jefferson Memorial, Washington DC
Monticello – Home of Thomas Jefferson
Poplar Forest-Thomas Jefferson's second home
"Frontline: Jefferson's blood: Chronology: The Sally Hemings story (1977), PBS
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson at the Avalon Project
Thomas Jefferson at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Notes on the State of Virginia from American Studies at the University of Virginia.
Works by Thomas Jefferson at Project Gutenberg
Online catalog of Thomas Jefferson's personal library, based on the catalog of books he sold to the Library of Congress in 1815
Works by or about Thomas Jefferson in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
The Thomas Jefferson Encyclopedia, for information on TJ's life and times, written and referenced by historians at Monticello
Political offices
Preceded by
John Adams	President of the United States
March 4, 1801 – March 4, 1809	Succeeded by
James Madison
Vice President of the United States
March 4, 1797 – March 4, 1801	Succeeded by
Aaron Burr
Preceded by
John Jay
as United States Secretary for Foreign Affairs	United States Secretary of State
Served under: George Washington
March 22, 1790 – December 31, 1793	Succeeded by
Edmund Randolph
Preceded by
Patrick Henry	Governor of Virginia
1779 – 1781	Succeeded by
William Fleming (acting);
Thomas Nelson, Jr. (elected)
Party political offices
New political party	Democratic-Republican Party presidential candidate
1796¹, 1800, 1804	Succeeded by
James Madison
Diplomatic posts
Preceded by
Benjamin Franklin	United States Minister Plenipotentiary to France
1785 – 1789	Succeeded by
William Short
Notes and references
1. Prior to the passage of the Twelfth Amendment in 1804, each Presidential elector would cast two ballots; the highest vote-getter would become President and the runner-up would become Vice President. Thus, in 1796, the Democratic-Republican Party fielded Jefferson as a Presidential candidate, but he came in second and therefore became Vice President.
v • d • e
Signers of the Declaration of Independence
J. Adams • S. Adams • Bartlett • Braxton • Carroll • Chase • Clark • Clymer • Ellery • Floyd • Franklin • Gerry • Gwinnett • Hall • Hancock • Harrison • Hart • Hewes • Heyward • Hooper • Hopkins • Hopkinson • Huntington • Jefferson • F. Lee • R. Lee • Lewis • Livingston • Lynch • McKean • Middleton • L. Morris • R. Morris • Morton • Nelson • Paca • Paine • Penn • Read • Rodney • Ross • Rush • Rutledge • Sherman • Smith • Stockton • Stone • Taylor • Thornton • Walton • Whipple • Williams • Wilson • Witherspoon • Wolcott • Wythe

v • d • e
Presidents of the United States
	
George Washington · John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · James Madison · James Monroe · John Quincy Adams · Andrew Jackson · Martin Van Buren · William Henry Harrison · John Tyler · James K. Polk · Zachary Taylor · Millard Fillmore · Franklin Pierce · James Buchanan · Abraham Lincoln · Andrew Johnson · Ulysses S. Grant · Rutherford B. Hayes · James A. Garfield · Chester A. Arthur · Grover Cleveland · Benjamin Harrison · Grover Cleveland · William McKinley · Theodore Roosevelt · William Howard Taft · Woodrow Wilson · Warren G. Harding · Calvin Coolidge · Herbert Hoover · Franklin D. Roosevelt · Harry S. Truman · Dwight D. Eisenhower · John F. Kennedy · Lyndon B. Johnson · Richard Nixon · Gerald Ford · Jimmy Carter · Ronald Reagan · George H. W. Bush · Bill Clinton · George W. Bush · Barack Obama

v • d • e
Vice Presidents of the United States
	
John Adams · Thomas Jefferson · Aaron Burr · George Clinton · Elbridge Gerry · Daniel D. Tompkins · John C. Calhoun · Martin Van Buren · Richard Mentor Johnson · John Tyler · George M. Dallas · Millard Fillmore · William R. King · John C. Breckinridge · Hannibal Hamlin · Andrew Johnson · Schuyler Colfax · Henry Wilson · William A. Wheeler · Chester A. Arthur · Thomas A. Hendricks · Levi P. Morton · Adlai E. Stevenson I · Garret Hobart · Theodore Roosevelt · Charles W. Fairbanks · James S. Sherman · Thomas R. Marshall · Calvin Coolidge · Charles G. Dawes · Charles Curtis · John Nance Garner · Henry A. Wallace · Harry S. Truman · Alben W. Barkley · Richard Nixon · Lyndon B. Johnson · Hubert Humphrey · Spiro Agnew · Gerald Ford · Nelson Rockefeller · Walter Mondale · George H. W. Bush · Dan Quayle · Al Gore · Dick Cheney · Joe Biden

v • d • e
United States Secretary of State
Secretary of Foreign Affairs
1781-1789	
R. Livingston • Jay

Secretary of State
1789-Pres.	
Jefferson • Randolph • Pickering • J. Marshall • Madison • Smith • Monroe • Adams • Clay • Van Buren • E. Livingston • McLane • Forsyth • Webster • Upshur • Calhoun • Buchanan • Clayton • Webster • Everett • Marcy • Cass • Black • Seward • Washburne • Fish • Evarts • Blaine • Frelinghuysen • Bayard • Blaine • Foster • Gresham • Olney • Sherman • Day • Hay • Root • Bacon • Knox • Bryan • Lansing • Colby • Hughes • Kellogg • Stimson • Hull • Stettinius • Byrnes • G Marshall • Acheson • Dulles • Herter • Rusk • Rogers • Kissinger • Vance • Muskie • Haig • Shultz • Baker • Eagleburger • Christopher • Albright • Powell • Rice • Clinton
v • d • e
Governors of Virginia
	
Henry · Jefferson · Fleming · Nelson · Harrison · Henry · E. Randolph · B. Randolph · H. Lee · Brooke · Wood · Monroe · Page · Cabell · Tyler Sr. · G. Smith · Monroe · G. Smith · P. Randolph · Barbour · Nicholas · Preston · T. Randolph · Pleasants · Tyler Jr. · Giles · J. Floyd · Tazewell · Robertson · Campbell · Gilmer · Patton · Rutherfoord · Gregory · McDowell · W. "EB" Smith · J.B. Floyd · Johnson · Wise · Letcher · W. "EB" Smith · Pierpont · Wells · Walker · Kemper · Holliday · Cameron · F. Lee · McKinney · O'Ferrall · J.H. Tyler · Montague · Swanson · Mann · Stuart · Davis · Trinkle · Byrd · Pollard · Peery · Price · Darden · Tuck · Battle · Stanley · Almond · A. Harrison · Godwin · Holton · Godwin · Dalton · Robb · Baliles · Wilder · Allen · Gilmore · Warner · Kaine · McDonnell
v • d • e
 United States Ambassadors to France 
Envoys	
Benjamin Franklin, Arthur Lee, Silas Deane (substituted by John Adams in 1778) 1776–1779
Ministers Plenipotentiary	
Franklin 1778–85 · Jefferson 1785–89 · Short 1790–92 · Morris 1792–94 · Monroe 1794–96 · Pinckney 1796–97 · Livingston 1801–04 · Armstrong 1804–10 · Russell (chargé d'affaires) 1811 Barlow 1811–12 · Crawford 1813–15
Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary	
Gallatin 1816–23 · Brown 1824–29 · Rives 1829–32 · Harris (chargé d'affaires) 1833 · Livingston 1833–35 · Barton (chargé d'affaires) 1835 · Cass 1836–42 · King 1844–46 · Rush 1847–49 · Rives 1849–53 · Mason 1853–59 · Faulkner 1860–61 · Dayton 1861–64 · Bigelow 1865–66 · Dix 1866–69 · Washburne 1869–77 · Noyes 1877–81 · Morton 1881–85 · McLane 1885–89 · Reid 1889–92 · Coolidge 1892–93
Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary	
Eustis 1893–97 · Porter 1897–05 · McCormick 1905–07 · White 1907–09 · Bacon 1909–12 · Herrick 1912–14 · Sharp 1914–1919 · Wallace 1919–21 · Herrick 1921–29 · Edge 1929–33 · Straus 1933–36 · Bullitt 1936–40 · Leahy 1941–42 · Tuck (chargé d'affaires) 1942 · Caffery 1944–49 · Bruce 1949–52 · Dunn 1952–53 · Dillon 1953–57 · Houghton 1957–61 · Gavin 1961–62 · Bohlen 1962–68 · Shriver 1968–70 · Watson 1970–72 · Irwin 1973–74 · Rush 1974–77 · Hartman 1977–81 · Galbraith 1981–85 · Rodgers 1985–89 · Curley 1989–93 · Harriman 1993–97 · Rohatyn 1997–2000 · Leach 2001–05 · Stapleton 2005–09 · Rivkin 2009–
v • d • e
Figures in the Age of Enlightenment by country or region
 Notable figures
America (English)	
Benjamin Franklin · Thomas Jefferson · James Madison · Thomas Paine
America (Latin)	
Simón Bolívar  · Eugenio Espejo  · José Joaquín Fernández de Lizardi · Servando Teresa de Mier · Francisco de Miranda · Simón Rodríguez
England	
Edward Gibbon · Thomas Hobbes  · Samuel Johnson · Edmund Burke (Irish born)  · John Locke  · Isaac Newton  · Robert Walpole
France	
Montesquieu · François Quesnay · Voltaire · Buffon · Jean-Jacques Rousseau · Denis Diderot · Helvétius · Jean le Rond d'Alembert · Baron d'Holbach · Condorcet · Étienne Bonnot de Condillac
Germany	
Immanuel Kant · Gotthold Ephraim Lessing · Johann Gottfried von Herder · Johann Wolfgang von Goethe · Friedrich Schiller · Moses Mendelssohn
Greece	
Adamantios Korais · Rigas Feraios · Theophilos Kairis · Eugenios Voulgaris
Hungary	
Ferenc Kazinczy · József Kármán · János Batsányi · Mihály Fazekas
Italy	
Cesare Beccaria · Antonio Genovesi
Low Countries	
Hugo Grotius · Baruch Spinoza · Franciscus van den Enden
Poland-Lithuania	
Stanisław Konarski · Ignacy Krasicki · Hugo Kołłątaj · Stanisław Staszic · Jan Śniadecki · Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz · Jędrzej Śniadecki
Portugal	
Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo, Marquis of Pombal
Russia	
Mikhail Lomonosov · Ivan Shuvalov · Ivan Betskoy · Ekaterina Dashkova · Nikolay Novikov · Mikhail Shcherbatov · Alexander Radishchev
Scandinavia	
Anders Chydenius · Peter Forsskål · Gustav III · Ludvig Holberg · Arvid Horn · Johan Henric Kellgren · Eggert Ólafsson  · Henrik Gabriel Porthan · Jens Schielderup Sneedorff · Johann Friedrich Struensee · Emanuel Swedenborg
Scotland	
Joseph Black · James Boswell · Robert Burns · Adam Ferguson · Francis Hutcheson · David Hume · James Hutton · Lord Kames · Lord Monboddo · James Macpherson · Thomas Reid · William Robertson · Adam Smith · Dugald Stewart · James Watt
Serbia	
Dositej Obradović
Spain	
Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos · Benito Jerónimo Feijoo · Antonio de Ulloa
Ukraine	
Hryhorii Skovoroda · Ivan Kotlyarevsky
 Related topics
Atheism · Capitalism · Civil liberties · Counter-Enlightenment · Critical thinking · Deism · Democracy · Empiricism · Enlightened absolutism · Free markets · Haskalah · Humanism · Liberalism · Natural philosophy · Rationality · Reason · Sapere aude · Science · Socialism · Secularism · French Encyclopédistes · Weimar Classicism
v • d • e
Cabinet of President George Washington (1789–1797)
Vice President	
John Adams (1789–1797)

Secretary of Foreign Affairs	
John Jay (1789)
Secretary of State	
Thomas Jefferson (1790–1793) · Edmund Randolph (1794–1795) · Timothy Pickering (1795–1797)
Secretary of the Treasury	
Alexander Hamilton (1789–1795) · Oliver Wolcott, Jr. (1795–1797)
Secretary of War	
Henry Knox (1789–1794) · Timothy Pickering (1795) · James McHenry (1796–1797)
Attorney General	
Edmund Randolph (1789–1794) · William Bradford (1794–1795) · Charles Lee (1795–1797)
Postmaster General	
Samuel Osgood (1789–1791) · Timothy Pickering (1791–1795) · Joseph Habersham (1795–1797)
v • d • e
Cabinet of President John Adams (1797–1801)
Vice President	
Thomas Jefferson (1797–1801)

Secretary of State	
Timothy Pickering (1797–1800) • John Marshall (1800–1801)
Secretary of the Treasury	
Oliver Wolcott, Jr. (1797–1801) • Samuel Dexter (1801)
Secretary of War	
James McHenry (1796–1800) • Samuel Dexter (1800–1801)
Attorney General	
Charles Lee (1797–1801)
Secretary of the Navy	
Benjamin Stoddert (1798–1801)
v • d • e
Cabinet of President Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
Vice President	
Aaron Burr (1801–1805) · George Clinton (1805–1809)

Secretary of State	
James Madison (1801–1809)
Secretary of the Treasury	
Samuel Dexter (1801) · Albert Gallatin (1801–1809)
Secretary of War	
Henry Dearborn (1801–1809)
Attorney General	
Levi Lincoln, Sr. (1801–1804) · Robert Smith (1805) · John Breckinridge (1805–1806) · Caesar A. Rodney (1807–1809)
Secretary of the Navy	
Benjamin Stoddert (1801) · Robert Smith (1801–1809)

Categories: United States Secretaries of State | Washington administration cabinet members | John Adams cabinet members | 1743 births | 1826 deaths | 18th-century vice presidents of the United States | 19th-century presidents of the United States | American archaeologists | American architects | American book and manuscript collectors | American farmers | American foreign policy writers | American gardeners | American inventors | American people of English descent | American people of Scottish descent | American people of Welsh descent | American philosophers | American political philosophers | American planters | American Unitarians | British North American Anglicans | Classical liberalism | College of William & Mary alumni | Continental Congressmen from Virginia | Deaths from pneumonia | Enlightenment philosophers | Gentleman scientists | Governors of Virginia | History of the United States (1789–1849) | House of Burgesses members | Jefferson family | Members of the Virginia House of Delegates | People from Charlottesville, Virginia | People of Virginia in the American Revolution | Physiocrats | Pre-19th-century cryptographers | Presidents of the United States | Randolph family of Virginia | Religious skeptics | Signers of the United States Declaration of Independence | Thomas Jefferson | United States ambassadors to France | United States presidential candidates, 1792 | United States presidential candidates, 1796 | United States presidential candidates, 1800 | United States presidential candidates, 1804 | University of Virginia people | Vice Presidents of the United States | Virginia Democratic-Republicans | Virginia lawyers | Writers from Virginia | Democratic-Republican Party Presidents of the United States | Democratic-Republican Party Vice Presidents of the United States
