
Evolutionary biology
Part of the Biology series on
Evolution
Mechanisms and processes
Adaptation
Genetic drift
Gene flow
Mutation
Natural selection
Speciation
Research and history
Introduction
Evidence
Evolutionary history of life
History
Level of support
Modern synthesis
Objections / Controversy
Social effect
Theory and fact
Evolutionary biology fields
Cladistics
Ecological genetics
Evolutionary development
Evolutionary psychology
Molecular evolution
Phylogenetics
Population genetics
Systematics
Biology portal · v • d • e 
Evolutionary biology is a sub-field of biology concerned with the origin of species from a common descent and descent of species, as well as their change, multiplication and diversity over time. Someone who studies evolutionary biology is known as an evolutionary biologist. To philosopher Kim Sterelny, "the development of evolutionary biology since 1858 is one of the great intellectual achievements of science".[1]
Contents [hide]
1 Description
2 History
3 Notable evolutionary biologists
4 Bibliography
4.1 Textbooks
4.2 Notable monographs and other works
5 Topics in evolutionary biology
6 Relationship to other biological disciplines
7 See also
8 References
[edit]Description

Evolutionary biology is an interdisciplinary field because it includes scientists from a wide range of both field and lab oriented disciplines. For example, it generally includes scientists who may have a specialist training in particular organisms such as mammalogy, ornithology, or herpetology, but use those organisms as case studies to answer general questions in evolution. It also generally includes paleontologists and geologists who use fossils to answer questions about the tempo and mode of evolution, as well as theoreticians in areas such as population genetics and evolutionary psychology. Experimentalists have used selection in Drosophila to develop an understanding of the evolution of aging, and experimental evolution is a very active subdiscipline.
In the 1990s developmental biology made a re-entry into evolutionary biology, from its initial exclusion from the modern synthesis, through the study of evolutionary developmental biology.
Findings from evolutionary biology feed strongly into new disciplines that study mankind's sociocultural evolution and evolutionary behavior. Evolutionary biology's frameworks of ideas and conceptual tools are now finding application in the study of a range of subjects from computing to nanotechnology. It also contributes to the field of evolutionary medicine.[2][3]
Artificial life is a sub-field of bioinformatics that attempts to model, or even recreate, the evolution of organisms as described by evolutionary biology. Usually this is done through mathematics and computer models.
[edit]History

Main article: History of evolutionary thought
Evolutionary biology as an academic discipline in its own right emerged as a result of the modern evolutionary synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s.[4] It was not until the 1970s and 1980s, however, that a significant number of universities had departments that specifically included the term evolutionary biology in their titles. In the United States, as a result of the rapid growth of molecular and cell biology, many universities have split (or aggregated) their biology departments into molecular and cell biology-style departments and ecology and evolutionary biology-style departments (which often have subsumed older departments in paleontology, zoology and the like).
Microbiology has recently developed into an evolutionary discipline. It was originally ignored due to the paucity of morphological traits and the lack of a species concept in microbiology. Now, evolutionary researchers are taking advantage of our extensive understanding of microbial physiology, the ease of microbial genomics, and the quick generation time of some microbes to answer evolutionary questions. Similar features have led to progress in viral evolution, particularly for bacteriophages.
[edit]Notable evolutionary biologists

Main category: Evolutionary biologists
Notable contributors to evolutionary biology
Richard D. Alexander
William H. Cade
Sean B. Carroll
Brian Charlesworth
Deborah Charlesworth
Bryan Clarke
Jerry Coyne
James Crow
Charles Darwin
Richard Dawkins
Jared Diamond
Theodosius Dobzhansky
Niles Eldredge
R. A. Fisher
Edmund Brisco Ford
Stephen Jay Gould
Rosemary Grant
Ernst Haeckel
J. B. S. Haldane
W. D. "Bill" Hamilton
Judith Hand
Julian Huxley
Daniel Janzen
Motoo Kimura
Alexey Kondrashov
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
Richard Levins
Richard Lewontin
Gustave Malécot
Lynn Margulis
Pierre Louis Maupertuis
Ernst Mayr
Ivan Vladimirovich Michurin
Hermann Joseph Muller
George and Elizabeth Peckham
Edward Loranus Rice
Barbara A. Schaal
John Maynard Smith
Mark G. Thomas
Robert Trivers
Leigh Van Valen
Alfred Russel Wallace
August Weismann
George C. Williams
Allan Wilson
Edward Osborne Wilson
Sewall Wright
Carl Woese
Emile Zuckerkandl
Evolutionary biologists known primarily for their science popularization
Richard Dawkins
Stephen Jay Gould
Steve Jones
Kenneth R. Miller
Notable popularizers of evolution whose research isn't primarily concerned with evolutionary biology
Robert Ardrey
Peter Atkins
Daniel Dennett
Greg Graffin
Christopher Hitchens
Steven Pinker
Matt Ridley
Michael Ruse
Carl Sagan
[edit]Bibliography

[edit]Textbooks
Douglas J. Futuyma, Evolutionary Biology (3rd Edition), Sinauer Associates (1998) ISBN 0-87893-189-9
Douglas J. Futuyma, Evolution, Sinauer Associates (2005) ISBN 0-87893-187-2
Mark Ridley, Evolution (3rd edition), Blackwell (2003) ISBN 1-4051-0345-0
Scott R. Freeman and Jon C. Herron, Evolutionary Analysis, Prentice Hall (2003) ISBN 0-13-101859-0
Michael R. Rose and Laurence D. Mueller, Evolution and Ecology of the Organism, Prentice Hall (2005) ISBN 0-13-010404-3
Monroe W. Strickberger, Evolution (3rd Edition), Jones & Bartlett Publishers (2000) ISBN 0-7637-1066-0
[edit]Notable monographs and other works
Main article: :List of publications in biology
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1809) Philosophie Zoologique
Charles Darwin (1859) The Origin of Species
Charles Darwin (1871) The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex
R. A. Fisher (1930) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection
J. B. S. Haldane (1932) The Causes of Evolution
Ernst Mayr (1941) Systematics and the Origin of Species
Susumu Ohno (1970) Evolution by gene duplication
Richard Dawkins (1976) The Selfish Gene
Richard Dawkins (2004) The Ancestor's Tale
Motoo Kimura (1983) The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution
Stephen Jay Gould (2002) The Structure of Evolutionary Theory
[edit]Topics in evolutionary biology

Fitness landscape
Foster's rule
Koinophilia
List of other evolutionary biology topics
Muller's ratchet
Mutational meltdown
[edit]Relationship to other biological disciplines

 

The structure of evolutionary biology and its relationship to other biological disciplines. The history and causes of evolution (center) are the subject of the various subdisciplines of evolutionary biology (inner ring), which grade into one another and, as shown by the arrows, are related both to one another and to other disciplines (outer ring). The areas of the segments in the diagram convey an impression of the historical contributions of the subdisciplines to the literature of evolutionary biology. (Click on individual words for links to other articles or click here for the original non-clickable image)
[edit]See also

	Evolutionary biology portal
Artificial selection
Computational phylogenetics
Evolution of dietary antioxidants
Evolutionary ecology
Evolutionary physiology
Evolutionary tree
Experimental evolution
Genetics
Paleontology
Phylogenetic comparative methods
Phylogenetics
Quantitative genetics
Selective breeding
Sexual selection
Systematics
Evolutionary dynamics
[edit]References

^ Sterelny, K. (2009). "Philosophy of Evolutionary Thought". In Michael Ruse & Joseph Travis. Evolution: The First Four Billion Years. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. p. 313. ISBN 978-0-674-03175-3.
^ Nesse, R.M., & Williams, G.C. (1996). Evolution and Healing: The New Science of Darwinian Medicine. London: Phoenix. ISBN 1-85799-506-6.
^ Antolin, M.F. (2009). "Evolutionary Biology of Disease and Darwinian Medicine". In Michael Ruse & Joseph Travis. Evolution: The First Four Billion Years. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. pp. 281–298. ISBN 978-0-674-03175-3.
^ Sterelny (2009) p.314
v • d • e
Major subfields of biology
Anatomy · Astrobiology · Biochemistry · Biomechanics · Biophysics · Bioinformatics · Biostatistics · Botany · Cell biology · Cellular microbiology · Chemical biology · Chronobiology · Conservation biology · Developmental biology · Ecology · Epidemiology · Evolutionary biology · Genetics · Genomics · Histology · Human biology · Immunology · Marine biology · Mathematical biology · Microbiology · Molecular biology · Mycology · Neuroscience · Nutrition · Origin of life · Paleontology · Parasitology · Pathology · Pharmacology · Physiology · Systems biology · Taxonomy · Toxicology · Zoology
v • d • e
Basic topics in evolutionary biology
Evidence of common descent
Processes of evolution	
Adaptation · Macroevolution · Microevolution · Speciation
Population genetic mechanisms	
Genetic drift · Gene flow · Mutation · Natural selection
Evolutionary developmental
biology (Evo-devo) concepts	
Canalisation · Inversion · Modularity · Phenotypic plasticity
Evolution of organs
and biological processes	
Aging · Cellular · DNA · The Ear · The Eye · Flagella · Flight · Hair · Human intelligence · Modular · Multicellular · Sex
Taxa evolution	
Birds · Butterflies · Cephalopods · Dinosaurs · Dolphins and whales · Fungi · Horses · Humans · Influenza · Insects · Lemur · Life · Molluscs · Plants · Sirenians (sea cows) · Spiders · Viruses
Modes of speciation	
Anagenesis · Catagenesis · Cladogenesis
History of evolutionary thought	
Charles Darwin · On the Origin of Species · Modern evolutionary synthesis · Gene-centered view of evolution · Life (classification trees)
Other subfields	
Ecological genetics · Molecular evolution · Phylogenetics · Systematics
List of evolutionary biology topics · Timeline of evolution
Categories: Evolutionary biology
